596 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 18

PREM EM EME TO २ २७ E EE COLE HEE EERE ON THEE TOT TENEEUHOREREAR ERNE EERE RENE OREO RE ना २० #न

दृष्टिपूतं न्यसेत् पादं वस्त्रपूतं पिबेज्जलम्। सत्यपूतां ae वाचं मन:पूतं समाचरेत् । १६।
मौनानीहानिलायामा दण्डा वाग्देहचेतसाम्। न ह्येते wer wag वेणुभिर्न भवेद् aft: । १७॥
भिक्षां चतुर्षु वर्णेषु विगर्ह्यन् वर्जयंश्चरेत् | सप्तागारानसंक्रप्तांस्तुष्येल्लब्धेन तावता । १८।
अहिर्जलाशयं गत्वा तत्रोपस्पृश्य वाग्यत: । क्भिज्य पावितं 28 भुञ्जीताशेषमाहतम् । १९॥
एकश्चरेमहीमेतां fag: संयतेन्द्रिय: | आत्मक्रीड आत्मरत आत्मवान् समदर्शान: 1201
विविक्तक्षेमशरणो मद्भावविमलाहाय: । आत्मानं चिन्तयेदेकमभेदेन मया मुनि: । २१।
अन्वीक्षेतात्मनो बन्धं मोक्षं च ज्ञाननिष्ठया ae इन्दरियविक्षेपो मोक्ष wat च संयम: 1221
तस्मान्नियम्य षड्वर्ग मद्धावेन चरेन्मुनि: । विरक्त: क्षुल्लकामेभ्यो लब्ध्वाऽत्पनि qe महत् 123)
पुरग्रामव्रजान् सार्थान् भिक्षार्थं प्रविशंश्चरेत्। पुण्यदेशसरिच्छैलवनाश्रमवतीं महीम् । २४॥
वानप्रस्थाश्रमपदेषुभीक्ष्णं भैक्ष्यमाचरेत् । संसिध्यत्याश्वसंमोह: शुद्धसत्त्व: शिलान्धसा । २५॥

The glorious Lord began again : Committing his wife to the care of his sons, the
householder whois keen to retire into the woods (enter the life of an anchorite) should spend
the third part of his life in the forest alone or even with his wife with his senses fully
controlled.(1) He should subsist on wild bulbs, roots and fruits which are fit for being offered
into the sacrificial fire and should wear as his apparel the bark of trees or matting etc., made
of grass or leaves or deerskin. (2) He should allow the hair of his head as well as on his body,
nails, moustaches and beard as well as the dirt on his body to grow and should not (even)
scrub his teeth (with a brush etc.), should take a plunge bath (after the manner of a pestle
without rubbing his body) three times (daily, viz., in the morning and evening as well as at
midday) and should sleep on the ground (covered with grass etc.). (3) In summer he should
allow himself to be heated by five fires (one placed in each quarter about himself and the fifth
in the form of the sun blazing overhead); during the rains he should expose" himself to
showers while in the closing months (Magha and Phalguna) of winter (comprising what is
known as the Sigira Rtu and roughly corresponding to January and February of the English
calender) he should remain immersed up to the neck in water.tHe should practise
austerities, following this mode of life. (4) He is permitted to eat (only) what is roasted in fire
or gets ripened by (process of) time. He can thrash (wild corn) in a mortar (with a pestle) and
pound hard substances with a stone or may use the teeth alone for a mortar (and pestle). (5)
Fully aware of the place and time where and when a certain thing could be had as well as
of his own (digestive) power he should personally get together (all) the means of his
subsistence and should never use what was got at another time + (and laid by for future
use).(6) An ascetic should perform rites (such as the Agrayana) enjoinedat particular periods
of time with oblations prepared out of wild products; but he should on no account propitiate
Me through (the sacrifice of) an animal as enjoined by the Vedas. (7) Agnihotra (offering to
the sacred fire an oblation consisting chiefly of milk, oil and sour gruel), Darga (half-monthly
sacrifice performed on every Amavasya or the new moon) Purnamasa (the half-monthly
sacrifice performed on every full moon) and the (three) sacrifices performed at the beginning
of the three seasons of four months each (under the names of Vaiswadeva, Varunapraghasa

* This Is technicalty known by the name of Abhravakasa-Vrata

+ This has been mentioned in the Smrt:-texts under the name of Udaka-vasa-Vrata

+Cf Vil xi 19, where ananchonite has been calted upon to reject the old stock each timea fresh {natural) supply of cereals
and other eatables ts obtained.
