320 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

PEE Re AA EHH ESSA ELA ESTE EAH AES ECCEL AV ELAR ERE SHA OA MEL AEM EE AHHH

माया dm भवदीया fe भूमन् aed षष्ठ: पञ्चभिर्भासि ya: i201
The guardians of the spheres said ; Can You be seen with our senses, revealing as
they do this unreal (illusory) world of matter—You, who witness things from within our heart
and by whom all this phenomenal world is seen ? It is Your Maya (conjuring feat), O infinite

Lord, that though the sixth (transcending the five elements), You appear invested with a
material body (consisting of the five elements). (37)

APR Hy:
प्रेयान्न तेऽन्योऽस्त्यमुतस्त्वयि sat faweriaa gra आत्मन: |
अथापि भक्त्येशातयोपधावतामनन्यवृत्तयानुगृहाण वत्सल । ३८।

जगदुद्भवस्थितिलयेषु दॆवतो बहुभिद्यमानगुणयाऽऽत्ममायया ।
रचितात्मभेदमतये स्वसंस्थथा विनिवर्तितभ्रमगुणात्मने नम: । ३९1
The Masters of Yoga (Sanaka and others) said : No one else is dearer to You than

he, O Lord, who sees no difference between You, the Soul of the universe, and himself.
Nevertheless, be gracious. O Lover of Your devotees, to them (as well) who resort to You
with exclusive devotion as to their master. (88) By Your Maya, which exhibits a large variety
of Gunas (Sattva etc.), due to the destiny (of the Jivas), You give rise toa sense of diversity
(in the people) with regard to Your Self (by assuming a multiplicity of forms such as Brahma,
Visnu and Siva) for the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe, although in
Your own (absolute) state You have cast off from Your Self all motions of diversity as well
as the three Gunas (which are responsible for the same). Obeisance to You. (39)

ब्रह्मोवाच
नमस्ते श्रितसत्त्वाय धर्मादीनां च सूतये । निर्गुणाय च यत्काष्ठां नाहं वेदापरेऽपि च ।`४०॥
Brahma (Veda Incarnate) said : Hail to You, who take upon Yourself the quality of
Sattva (goodness) in order to yield Dharma (righteousness) and the other objects of human
pursuit, and are at the same time destitute of all attributes, and whose real nature neither |
nor even others know. (40)
अग्निरुवाच

यत्तेजसाहं सुसमिद्धतेजा ह्य वहे स्वध्वर आज्यसिक्तम् ।
तं यज्ञियं ugfad च पञ्चभि: fas यजुर्भि: प्रणतोऽस्मि यज्ञम् ।४१।
Agni (the god of fire) said : With my flames brightly kindled by Your effulgence | bear
(to the gods) the oblations soaked in clarified butter in every good sacrifice. You are Yajiia
(sacrifice) personified as well as the Protector of sacrifices. You are fivefold in character (in
the form of the five varieties* of sacrifices) and are duly worshipped with the five kinds of
sacrificial formulas + occuring in the Yajurveda. | bow low to You. (41)
पुरा कल्पापाये स्वकृतमुदरीकृत्य विकृतं त्वमेवाद्यस्तस्मिन् सलिल उरगेन्द्राधिशययने |
पुमान् होषे सिद्धैर्हृदि विमृशिताध्यात्मपदवि: स एवाद्याक्ष्णोर्य: पथि चरसि भृत्यानवसि न: ।४२।
+ The five varieties of sacrifices are : Agnihotra, Darga, Paurnamasa, Caturmasya and Pasusoma..

+ The five kinds of sacrificial formulas mentioned in the Srutis are -—
(1) आश्रावय, (2) श्रौषट्, (3) यज, (4) ये यजामहॆ And (5) Fa

