Dis. 58 ] BOOK TEN 359

EERIE TIE i ASE TT SII i noone २ २3 व न

अथाष्टपञ्जाशत्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LVIII

Sri Krsna's espousal with (the rest of) His eight principal Spouses
a उवाच

एकदा पाण्डवान् se प्रतीतान् पुरुषोत्तम: | इन्द्रप्रस्थं गत: श्रीमान् युयुधानादिभिर्वृत: । १ ।

a तमागतं wal मुकुन्दमखिलेश्वरम्। उत्तस्थुर्युगपद dt: प्राणा मुख्यमिवागतम्। २ |

परिष्रज्याच्युतं वीरा अङ्गसङ्गहतेनस: । सानुरागस्मितं aed वीक्ष्य तस्य मुदं ययु: । ३ |

युधिष्ठिरस्य dine pet पादाभिवन्दनम्। फाल्गुनं परिरभ्याथ यमाभ्यां चाभिवन्दित: । ४ ।

परमासन आसीनं कृष्णा कृष्णमनिन्दिता । नवोढा व्रीडिता किञ्जिच्छनैरेत्याभ्यवन्दत । ५ ।

ada सात्यकि: पार्थै: पूजितश्चाभिवन्दित: । निषसादासनेऽन्ये च पूजिता: पर्युपासत । ६ |

gat समागत्य कृताभिवादनस्तयातिहार्दार्द्रदृशाभिरम्भित: ।
आपृष्टवांस्तां कुशकं सहस्रुषां पितृष्रसारं परिपृष्टवान्धव: । ७ ।

तमाह प्रेमवैक्कव्यरुद्धकण्ठाश्रुलोचना | स्मरन्ती तान् बहून् BI क्लेशापायात्मदर्छनम् । ८ ।

तदैव HTS नोऽभूत् सनाथास्ते कृता वयम्। ज्ञातीन् न: स्मरता कृष्ण भ्राता मे प्रेषितस्त्वया । ९ ।

न तेऽस्ति स्वपरभ्रान्तिर्विंश्चस्य सुहृदात्मन: | तथापि स्मरतां दश्वत् क्लेशान् हंसि हदि स्थित: 1201
Sri Suka began again : Once upon a time the glorious Sri Krsna (the foremost among
men), accompanied by Yuyudhana (Satyaki) and others, drove to Indraprastha (the modern
Delhi) to see Yudhisthira and his (four) brothers (the sons of Pandu), who had been seen (at
the court of Drupada, having once been taken to have been reduced to ashes within a house
of shellac). (1) Seeing Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), the Ruler of all, arrived
(attheir door), the valiant sons of Prtha (Sri Krsna’s aunt) rose (from their seat) at once (even)
as the senses become active (again) on finding respiration returned. (2) Embracing the
immortal Lord, with (all) their sins (of previous lives) wiped off by the (all-purifying) touch of
His (divine) person, the heroes were transported with joy tc gaze on His countenance bright
with loving smiles. (3) Bowing at the feet of Yudhisthira and Bhima (both of whom were senior
to Him), and then hugging Arjuna (who was born on a day when the constellation
Purvaphalguni was in the ascendant and was thus senior to the Lord only by eight days, the
latter's advent being marked by the ascendancy of Rohini, but was nevertheless treated as
His equal), He was (in His turn) saluted by Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin-born half-brothers
of Yudhisthira, who were the youngest and junior to the Lord). (4) Slowly approaching Sri
Krsna, who was seated on an excellent seat. Krsna (Draupadi, so-called because she had
a dark-brown complexion and thus bore affinity to the Lord in hue as well as in appellation),
who had been newly wedded and (therefore) felt a little abashed, and was (absolutely) free
from reproach (though espoused by all the five brothers), bowed low (to Him). (5) Honoured
and greeted in the same way by the sons of Prtha, Satyaki made Himself comfortable in his
(own) seat. Treated with respect, others too satin acircle nearby. (6) Having met andgreeted
His father's sister—Prtha, whose eyes were moistened through excessive love—and
hugged by her (in turn) and questioned about (the welfare of) His kinsfolk, He (gave suitable
replies to her and) made inquiries (in return) about her (own) health as well as about that of
her daughter-in-law (Draupadi).(7) Recalling her numerous past sufferings, Kunti, whose
