Dis. 5] BOOK FIVE 457

सं छ ज वी ड ह ङ व्ये कौ द्न्र ज क क त् कौ EHEREEELRERERKAEEEEEE EEE AHAACAE EEE EEE HAN प्तेप्रेंर्व्य\भेगैमैघेप्रैघेघे HRS K rs
SSS er See व as Sr er er ar क

compassionate man, who is himself aware of his own (real) interests, would urge them to
resort to such ignorance again, any more than he would direct a blind man who is following
a wrong track to continue on that path. (17) A preceptor is no preceptor, a relation is no
relation, a father is no father, a mother is no mother, a deity is no deity, nor is a husband a
husband, who is unable to redeem his pupil, relation, son, votary or wife fallen into (the
whirlpool of) transmigration. (18)

इदं शरीरं मम दुर्विभाव्यं wd fe 2 wd ap धर्म:।

ys pa A qed ame अतो fe मामृषभं प्राहुरार्या:।१९॥

अक्लिष्टबुद्ध्या भरतं भजध्वं शुश्रूषणं तद्भरणं प्रजानाम्।२०।

Wy वीरुदभ्य sam ये सरीसृपास्तेषु सबोधनिष्ठा:।

ततो मनुष्या: प्रमथास्ततोऽपि गन्धर्वसिद्धा विबुधानुगा ये।२१॥

देवासुरभ्यो मघवत्प्रधाना दक्षादयो ब्रह्मसुतास्तु तेषाम्।

wa: पर: sa विरिञ्चवीर्य: ai मत्परोऽहँ द्विजदेवदेव:। २२।

(The mystery of) this human semblance of Mine (assumed of My own free will) cannot
be easily understood. Indeed (pure) Sattva is My heart, where resides Dharma (righteous-
ness), and unrighteousness has been left far behind by Me. That is why worthy souls call Me
Rsabha (the foremost). (19) You are sprung from My heart (which as | have told you is made
up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas): therefore, with a mind free from envy, wait upon
that brother of yours, Bharata, who is a very noble soul; that will be (as good as) rendering
service to Me and (tantamount to) taking care of the people. (20) Mobile creatures are higher
than plants, which in their turn are by far the best among (other) created beings (such as
minerals and stones); and among these (again) beasts etc., (who are endowed with
intelligence) are the highest. Higher than these are human beings; while Pramathas (spirits
and genii forming the retinue of Lord Rudra, the god of destruction) are higher even than
human beings. Still higher are the Gandharvas (celestial musicians); the Siddhas (a class
of demigods who are naturally endowed with mystic powers) come next; while higher still are
the (other) attendants of gods (such as the Kinnaras). (21) (Still higher are the Asuras or
demons;) the gods with Indra as their leader are superior (even) to the Asuras and higher
still rank the (mind-born) sons of Brahma—Daksa and others. Of these (again) Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe) ranks the foremost and He in His turn is an offspring of Brahma (the
creator, who is, therefore, naturally higher than Siva). | am superior (even) to Brahma (the
creator), while the Brahmanas (the adored of the other twice-born classes) are worthy of
adoration even to Me (and therefore superior to Me). (22)

न ब्राह्मणैस्तुलये भूतमन्यत् पश्यामि fam: किमत: wt तु।
afer: ved श्रद्धयाहमश्नामि art न तथाग्निहोत्रे। २३॥
धृता तनूरुशती मे पुराणी येनेह सत्त्वं परमं पवित्रम्।
शमो दम: सत्यमनुग्रहश्च तपस्तितिक्षानुभवश्च यत्र। २४
मन्तोऽप्यनन्तात्परत:र परस्मात् स्वर्गापवर्गाधिपतेर्न किञ्चित्।
येषां किमु स्यादितरेण तेषामकिञ्चनानां मयि भक्तिभाजाम्।२५॥
। place no other living being on a par with the Brahmanas; what (other) creature, then,

can | regard as higher than they, O Brahmanas (assembled here)?'| eat My fill the food
offered to them by men in liberal quantities with reverence, but not so the oblations poured

[564] B. M. 17—
