776 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

८.३..३.१६.६.३..६.३..७.. ६८३३ ३..३.७३.३ 5३७ EK ECE EH ETHAN HL ETOH LEE SOR LEE HEE ERE TER EH STARS HEH AAR ३३१

तत्र दैवासुरो नाम रण: परमदारुण:। रोधस्युदन्वतो राजंस्तुमुलो रोमहर्षण: । ५ ।
TM सपत्नास्ते संरब्धमनसो wii समासाद्यासिभिर्बाणैर्निजघ्नुर्विविधायुधै:र । ६ |
शङ्खतूर्यमृदङ्गानां भेरीडमरिणां महान्।हस्त्यश्वरथपत्तीनां नदतां नि:स्वनोऽभवत्। ७ |
रथिनो रथिभिस्तत्र पत्तिभि: सह पत्तय:। हया हयैरिभाश्चेभै:; समसज्जन्त संयुगे । ८ ।
उष्टै: केचिदिभै: केचिदपरे युयुधु: खरें:।केक्वि गौरमृगैर्ऋक्षैर्दीपिभिर्हरिभिर्भटा: । ९ ।
शिवाभिराखुभिकेचित्क्काप्सें ॰”।बस्तरैकेळै POAT च Yt: ।११॥
अन्ये जलस्थलखगै: सत्त्वैर्विकृतविग्रहै: । सेनयोरुभवो राजन्विविशुस्तेऽग्रतोऽग्रत: 1221

Sri Suka resumed: In this way the Danavas and the Daityas could not obtain nectar, ©
ruler of men—even though they stood united and had been intent on doing (their) work (of
churning the ocean)—because they had turned their back on Lord Vasudeva.(1) Having
caused nectar to be obtained, O king, and made His devotees, the gods, drink of it, the Lord
mounted on (the back of) Garuda (the king of birds) and departed, while allliving beings stood
gazing. (2) Observing the highest good fortune( success) of their enemies and jealous of it,
the Daityas (sons of Diti) marched against the gods with uplifted weapons. (3) Reinvigorated
by the nectar drunk by them and having taken shelter in the feet of Lord Narayana, all the
gods thereupon offered a united resistance with their weapons.(4) There on the seashore
raged a most dreadful, thrilling and hand-to-hand fight, known by the name of a conflict
between the gods and the demons,O king! (5) With a mind full of rage, the aforesaid enemies
met at close quarters on that battle-field and struck one another with swords, arrows and
various(other) weapons.(6) Tremendous was the flourish of conchs and clarionets and the
noise of clay tomtoms, tabors and Damaris (a kind of drum) as well as of the trumpeting
elephants, neighing horses, rattling chariots and roaring foot-soldiers.(7) In that battle car-
warriors closed with car-warriors,infantrymen with infantrymen, horses with horses and
elephants with elephants. (8) Some warriors fought on the back of camels, some on
elephants and others on donkeys, (still) others fought on the back of Gauramrgas, bears,
panthers and lions. (9) Others fought on (the back of) vultures, buzards, herons, hawks and
Bhasas(a bird of prey soaring very high in the skies), Timingilas (whales), Sarabhas (an
eight-footed animal said to be stronger than a lion, the species of which has now become
extinct), bisons, rhinoceroses, bulls, Gayals and Arunas.(10) Some (more) fought on (the
back of) jackals, rats, chameleons, hares and men; others, on goats, black antelopes and
swans and still others on boars.(11) Some (again) fought on (the back of) birds of land and
water and (other) animals with deformed bodies. The warriors of both the armies, O king,
penetrated farther and farther (in their effort to worst their opponents). (12)

चित्रध्वजपटॆ Utara: «= सितामलै: | महाधनैर्वज्रदण्डैर्व्यजनैर्बार्हचामरै: 1231
वातोद्धूतोत्तरोष्णीषैरर्चिर्भिर्वर्मभूषणै: । स्फुरद्भिर्विशदै: ara: सुतरां सूर्यरर्मिभि: । १४॥
देवदानववरीराणां ध्वजिन्यौ पाण्डुनन्दन । रेजतुर्वीरमालाभिर्यादसामिव BUTT 1241

वैरोचनो बलि: aa सोऽसुराणां चमूपति: । यानं वैहायसं ama कामगं मयनिर्मितम् । १६॥
सर्वसाङ्ग्रामिकोपेते सर्वाश्चर्यमयं प्रभो । अप्रतर्क्यमनिर्देरयं दृश्यमानमदर्शनम् | V9 |
आस्थितस्तद् विमानाग्र्यं सर्वानीकाधिपैर्वृत: । वालव्यजनछत्राग्रयै रेजे चन्द्र इवोदये । १८॥
तस्यासन्सर्वतो यानैर्यूथानां पतयोऽसुरा: । नमुचि: seed anon विप्रचित्तिरयोमुख: ।१९॥
