392 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 64

FR ARTA EEE OOH TENN ANS SEE L SET L LE TLL EEN eee EERE TEKS EAR RED त्दे दे

it, please tell Us all about you." (8)
श्रीगुक sara
इति स्म राजा ays: कृष्णेनानन्तमूर्तिना। माधवं प्रणिपत्याह किरीटेनार्कवर्चसा । ९ ।

Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit !) questioned in these polite words by Sti Krsna, who is
possessed of infinite forms, King Nrga bowed to the Lord of Laksmi with his crown brilliant
as the sun, and submitted (as follows). (9)

नृग उवाच
qh am नरेन्द्रोऽहमिक्ष्वाकुतनय: प्रभो । दानिघ्वाख्यायमानेषु ale a कर्णमस्पृराम् । १०1
fe नु तेऽविदितं नाथ सर्वभूतात्मसाक्षिण: | कालेनाव्याहतदृशो वक्ष्येऽथापि तवाज्ञया ।॥११॥
यावत्य: सिकता भूमेर्यावत्यो दिवि ane: । यावत्यो वर्षधाराश्च तावतीरददां स्म गा: 1221
पयस्विनीस्तरुणी: शीलरूपगुणोपपन्नार कपिला sgt
न्यायार्जिता «SSR: सवत्सा दुकूलमालाभरणा ददावहम् ॥१३॥
स्वलङ्कृतेभ्यो गुणशीलवद्भ्य: सीदत्कुटुम्बेभ्य कऋतव्रतेभ्य: |
`तप-:श्रुतब्रह्मवदान्यसद्भ्य: wet युवभ्यो द्विजपुङ्खवेभ्य: ।१४॥
गोभूहिरण्यायतनाश्वहस्तिन: कन्या: सदासीस्तिलरूप्यशय्या: |
वासांसि wiht परिच्छदान् wits च यज्ञैश्चरितिं च पूर्तम् ।१५॥

Nrga said : | am a ruler of men, Nrga by name, son of Ikswaku, O Lord! Myname might
have reached Your ears, if the names of donors were (ever) mentioned (to You). (10) O Lord,
what is there unknown to You, the Witness of the mind of all beings ? Your vision remains
uninterrupted by time, yet! shall narrate my story to You in obedience to Your command. (71)
(Lord 1) | gave away to Brahmanas as many cows as there are particles of sand on the earth,
(nay,) as many as there are stars in the heavens and as many as rain-drops (falling on
earth).(12) They were all milch-cows, young and good-natured, beautiful in form and of good
breed, tawny in colour. | got them all with well-earned money. They had their calves with
them. Their horns were plated with gold and their hoofs with silver. They were all decorated
with silks, garlands and ornaments. (13) Adorning with clothes etc., the best of youthful
Brahmanas, who were even-minded and possessed of noble qualities and character, who
came ofa family suffering from want and who were pledged to truth, noted for their austerities
and generous in imparting the knowledge of the Vedas (to their students), | used to give those
cows to them. (14) | also gave away a number of oxen, lands, gold, houses, horses,
elephants, girls with maid-servants, (piles of) sesamum seeds, silver, beds, clothes, jewels,
household articles and chariots. (Besides these) | performed (many) sacrifices and carried
out several works of public utility. (15)

कस्यचिद् द्विजमुख्यस्य wo गौर्मम गोधने । सम्पृक्ताविदुषा सा च मया दत्ता द्विजातये । १६॥
fam विवदमानौ मामूचतु: स्वार्थसाधकौ । भवान् दातापहर्तेति तच्छुत्वा मेऽभवद् भ्रम: ।१८॥
अनुनीतावुभौ विप्रौ धर्मकृच्छ्रगतेन Sinai wet प्रकृष्टानां दास्याम्येषा प्रदीयताम् । १९1
भवन्तावनुगृह्णीतां किङ्करस्याविजानत: । समुद्धरत मां कृच्छ्रात् पतन्तं निरयेऽशुचौ ।२०॥
नाहं प्रतीच्छे वै राजन्नित्युक्त्वा स्वाम्यपाक्रमत्। नान्यद् गवामप्ययुतमिच्छामीत्यपरो ययौ ।२१॥
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे य'।ग्यैर्दूतेर्गंत्मि यमक्षयम् । यमेन पृष्टस्तत्राहुँ देवदेव जगत्पते 1221
पूर्वं त्वमशुभं भुङ्क्षे उताहो qua WMA दानस्य धर्मस्य ea लोकस्य भास्वत: । २३।
