148 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 4

Ke Ae eR eB वी ती toe ee EE ETE HE SST SKE EEA AHEM EAE CERAM ज्जीन्विक REHM HELE DH EER He

they did the intention of the Lord (who was bent upon the destruction of the Yadus). (24)
Some months after that incident, the Vrsnis, the Bhojas, the Andhakas and others drove in
their chariots to Prabhasa (a sacred spot on the seaside) with great joy, deluded as they were
by (the will of) Sri Krsna. (25) Having bathed there and propitiated the manes, gods and Rsis
by offering them handfuls of water, taken from that place, they gifted cows possessing many
good qualities to the Brahmanas. (26) They further gave away to them gold, silver, beds,
wearing apparel, deerskin, blankets, palanquins, chariots, elephants, unmarried girls, plots
of land as a means of subsistence and foods containing a variety of tastes, in a spirit of
dedication to the Lord, and then those valiant men, who lived for the sake of cows and the
Brahmanas alone, bowed to them with their heads touching the ground. (27-28)

Thus ends the third discourse in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samnhita.

२०१२ १. उ
PIRI Sie

BA चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

As directed by Uddhava, Vidura calls on the sage Maitreya
SET उवाच

अथ ते तदनुज्ञाता भुक्त्वा पीत्वा च वारुणीम्। तया विभ्रंशितज्ञाना दुरुक्तैर्मर्म पस्पृशु: । १ ।
a मैरेयदोषेण विषमीकृतचेतसाम्। निम्लोचति रवावासीद्देणूनामिव मर्दनम्। २ |
भगवान् स्वात्ममायाया गतिं तामवलोक्य स: | सरस्वतीमुपस्पृश्य वृक्षमूलमुपाविशत् । ३ ।
ae चोक्तो भगवता प्रपन्नार्तिहरेण ह। बदरीं त्वं प्रयाहीति स्वकुलं संजिहीर्षुणा । ४ |
अथापि तदभिप्रेतं जानन्नहमरिन्दम | पृष्ठतोऽन्वगमं भर्तु: पादविर्लेषणाक्षम: । ५ |
अद्राक्षमेकमासीनं विचिन्वन् दयितं पतिम्।श्रीनिकेतॆ सरस्वत्यां कृतकेतमकेतनम्। ६ |
श्यामावदातं विरजं प्रशान्तारुणलोचनम्। दोर्भिश्चतुर्भिर्विदिते पीतकौञाम्बरेण च । ७ |
am ऊरावधिश्रित्य दक्षिणाङ्घ्रिसरोरुहम्। अपाश्रितार्भकाश्वत्थमकृशं त्यक्तपिप्पलम् । ८ |
तस्मिन्महाभागवतो द्वैपायनसुहत्सखा | लोकाननुचरन् fg आससाद यदृच्छया । ९ |

तस्यानुरक्तस्य मुनेर्मुकुन्द: प्रमोदभावानतकन्धरस्य ।

आशृण्वतो `मामनुरागहाससमीक्षया विश्रमयन्नुवाच । १० |

Uddhava continued : Then, after taking their meals with the permission of those
Brahmanas, they drank wine and, having been deprived of their wits by tipsiness, cut one
another to the quick by hurling abuses. (1) Their intellect having been perverted due to the
inebriating effect of wine, by sunset they began fighting (to death) among themselves like
bamboos rubbing against one another. (2) Beholding the ways of His own Maya (deluding
potency), the Lord sipped the water from the Saraswati and sat down at the foot of a (peepul)
tree (near its bank). (3) (Before this) when the Lord, who relieves the agony of those who
resort to Him for protection, made up His mind to exterminate His race, He told me (even at
Dwaraka) to proceed to Badarivana (the spot where the divine sages Nara and Narayana

-Still practise their austere penance). (4) Although, O vanquisher of foes, | was aware of His
