3892`` SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 62

RRA T AAA RPA ASP CCLCAS SALSA SELLALASLASPRAR APIS SSS CL PERSP t PTAA teeta

अथ द्विषष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXIl

Aniruddha made captive

राजोवाच
बाणस्य तनयामूषामुपयेमे यदूत्तम: । तत्र युद्धमभूद् घोरं हरिङ्करयोर्महत्।
एतत् सर्वं महायोगिन् समाख्यातुं त्वमर्हसि । १ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted ; Aniruddha, a (veritable) jewel among the Yadus,
married Bana's daughter, Usa, and in that connection (1 am told) a great and terrible combat
ensued between Sri Krsna and Lord Sankara. May you be pleased to tell me all this in detail,
O great Yogi ! (1)

aye उवाच
बाण: पुत्रशतज्येष्ठो बलेरासीन्महात्मन: । येन वामनरूपाय हरयेऽदायि मेदिनी । २ ।
तस्यौरस: सुतो बाण: शिवभक्तिरत: सदा । मान्यो वदान्यो धीमांश्च सत्यसन्धो gene: । ३ ।
Tires पुरे रम्ये स राज्यमकरोत् Wide wh: प्रसादेन किङ्करा ga तेऽमरा: ।
सहस्रबाहुर्वाद्येन ताण्डवेऽतोषयन्मृडम् | ४ ।
भगवान् सर्वभूतेश: WO भक्तवत्सल:। वरेणच्छन्दयामास स तं वव्रे पुराधिपम्। ५ ।

Sri Suka replied : Bana was the eldest of the hundred sons of the high-souled Bali, by
whom the (entire) globe was given away to the Lord who appeared (before him) in the form
of the divine Dwarf. (2) Sprung from his loins, Bana even took delight in devotion to Lord Siva.
He was worthy of honour, liberal-minded, intelligent, true to his word and of firm resolve. (3)
He in those days ruled over the beautiful city known by the name of Sonitapura. By the grace
of Lord Siva the gods, though adorable (themselves), behaved towards him as servants.
Endowed (as he was) with a thousand arms, he propitiated Lord Siva (the Delighter of all)
by playing upon (various) musical instruments during the latter's Tandava dance. (4) The
almighty Sankara, the Ruler of all created beings, who affords shelter to alland is (so) fond
of His devotees, bade him ask (of Him) a boon of his choice. Banasura sought His (constant)
presence as a guardian of his city. (5)

स wrasse गिरिशं पार्श्वस्थं वीर्यदुर्मद: । किरीटेनार्कवर्णेन संस्पृशांस्तत्पदाम्बुजम् । ६ ।
नमस्ये wi महादेव लोकानां गुरुमीश्वरम्। पुंसामपूर्णकामानां कामपूरामराङ्ध्रिपम् |
aa त्वया at परं भाराय मेऽभवत्।त्रिलोक्यां प्रतियोद्धारं न लभे त्वदृते समम् । ८ ।
