Dis. 47 ] BOOK TEN 303

an te Carel e inn y Sine ee ees s Sesh eee eer eres Sete TTS etree marae a HH

mga ve queer erquageem: fa y werrafer te!

बलिमपि बलिमत्त्वावेष्टवद् aigaq यस्तदलमसितसस्यैर्दुस्त्यजस्तत्कथार्थ: 1291

ua गृहकुटुम्बं दीनमुत्सृज्य दीना बहव इह विहङ्गा भिक्षुचर्यां aie!

ददृशुरसकृदेतत्तन्नखस्पर्शतीव्रस्मररुज उपमन्तिन् भण्यतामन्यवार्तां 1१९1
प्रियसखपुनक्या:प्नेयसाप्नेषित:किंवस्यक्सिनुल्धेमांमनीयोऽसिमेङ्ख।

aft aa मधुपुर्यामार्यपुत्रोऽधुनाऽऽस्ते स्मरति स पितृगेहान् सौम्य बन्धूंश्च गोपान् ।
क्वचिदपि a कथा न: किङ्करीणां गृणीते भुजमशुरुसुगन्धं मूर्ध्यधास्यत् कदा नु । २१1

The Gopi said : 0 black bee (lit, the sucker of honey), 0 friend of Sri Krsna (a
treacherous lover), (pray) do not touch our feet (by way of supplication) with your (moustache-
like) tentacles tinged (red) with the saffron of the garland (of Sri Krsna) pressed against the
breasts (painted with saffron) of our rivals (at Mathura). Let Sri Krsna (the Chief of the
Madhus), whose messenger you are—you who are distinguished by such characteristics (as
have been depicted just now)—bear (on His garland etc.), the token of favour (in the shape
of marks of saffron etc.), of those proud ladies (of Mathura), which would be an object of
ridicule for the court of the Yadus. (What will you gain by conciliating us rustic women of
Vraja?) (12) Having allowed us to drink the entrancing nectar of His lips (but) once, He
deserted us, innocent women, all of a sudden (even) asa black bee like you would leave the
(guileless) flowers. | wonder how Laksmi (who is reputed to be very clever and discerning)
continues to serve His lotus-feet (which She would not if She came to know of His infidelity
and ungratefuiness) ? Presumably Sne does so (only) because She has Her mind captivated
alas ! by the honeyed words of our illustrious Lord (We for our part have grown too wise to
be deceived any more by His false promises). (13) Why do you, O six-legged one, glorify
before us homeless people here at (such) length Sri Krsna (now the Lord of the Yadus), the
(most) Ancient One (and therefore to well-known to us to need any introduction) ? Let His
stories be (profitably) sung in the presence of the (blessed) lady companions of Sri Krsna
(who is shortly going to be nicknamed as Arjuna’s Friend). They will (in return for Your
service) confer on you the object of your desire, beloved as they are of Him and have the
agony of their heart soothed (by His loving embraces). (14) What women are there on earth,
in heaven or in the subterranean regions, who are hard to win for the playful movements of
His eyebrows accompanied by His cunning and winsome smiles ? Of what account are we
in His eyes, whose dust of feet (even) Laksmi (the goddess of fortune) worships?
Nevertheless (tell Him that) the epithet of Uttamagloka (one enjoying excellent fame), as a
matter of fact, applies to him who espouses the cause of the forlorn (like) us. (15) Leave my
foot, on which you have placed your head, acquainted as | am with you, who know how to
win over others with blandishments and messages (of love), having learnt this art from Sri
Krsna (whois a past master in such artifices). (Ah,) He left here us, who had for His own sake
renounced our children, husband and (even happiness in) the other world (obtainable
through virtuous conduct alone), fickle-minded as He is. What, then, is to be gained by
coming to terms with Him ? (16) Hard-hearted by nature, He (in His previous descent as Sr
Rama) hit (with an arrow) Vali (the lord of the monkeys) like a hunter (without giving him any
