Dis. 15 } BOOK SEVEN ॥ 723

त्त वी ज् तीत्री जा क को कौत्जा WR Be जो EOE tr दो चच Ee HR ete toro Rot tt er RICO HH aR,

In these aforementioned bodies, O king, the Lord is present in different degrees (according
to the proportion of intelligence, power etc., manifest in them). Hence (because according
to this principle, a human soul manifests divinity in a greater degree than the sub-human
creation,) a human being (alone) is really deserving of honour. (Even) human beings are
worthy of respect more or less in proportion to the degree of self-consciousness manifest in
each (individual case)*.(38)

a तेर्षां मिथो नॄणामवज्ञानात्मतां नृप ।त्रेतादिषु हरेरर्चां क्रियायै कविभि: कृता ।३९॥

ततोऽर्चायां हरिं केचित् संश्रद्धाय सपर्यया । उपासत उपास्तापि नार्थदा पुरुषद्विषाम् ।४०॥

पुरुषेषपि राजेन्द्र सुपात्रं ब्राह्मणं fag: i तपसा विद्यया apm धत्ते वेदं हरेस्तनुम् ।४१॥

नन्वस्य ब्राह्मणा राजन्कृष्णस्य जगदात्मन: । पुनन्त: पादरजसा त्रिलोकीं दैवतं ceive
इति श्रोमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां सप्तमस्कन्धे सदाचारनिर्णयो नाम चतुर्दशोध्याय: ।१४॥

Perceiving the inclination among the aforesaid human souls to despise one another, 0
Yudhisthira, the image of Sri Hari was instituted by the wise for worship in Treta and the
following Yugas. (39) Thenceforward some people began to worship Sri Hari in images with
(various) articles of worship, viewing them with great reverence. Though (reverently)
worshipped, an image does not yield the desired result to misanthropes. (40) Even among
men, O king of kings, the wise recognize a Brahmana (a member of the priestly class) as
eminently worthy of respect. (For) by virtue of (his) asceticism, learning and contentment he
preserves the Veda, constituting the body of Sri Hari. (41) Sanctifying the three worlds
(heaven, earth and the aerial region) with the (very) dust of their feet, the Brahmanas, O king
are indeed worthy of great adoration even in the eyes of Sri Krsna, the Soul of the
universe.(42)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled “An inquiry into right conduct (continued)’,
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Puradna,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Seite tice
PISS irre

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV
An inquiry into right conduct (concluded)
ANG उवाच
कर्मनिष्ठा fem: केचित् तपोनिष्ठा qo) स्वाध्यायेऽन्ये प्रवचने ये केचिज्ञानयोगयो: । १ ।
ज्ञाननिष्ठाय देयानि कव्यान्यानन्त्यमिच्छता । दैवे च ama स्यादितरेभ्यो यथार्हत: । २ ।
a दैवे पितृकार्ये त्रीनेकैकमुभयत्र वा । भोजयेत् सुसमृद्धोऽपि ong कुर्यान्न विस्तरम् । ३ ।
देशकालोचितश्रद्धाद्रव्यपात्रार्हणानि च । सम्यग् भवन्ति नैतानि विस्तरात् स्वजनार्पणात् । ४ ।
देशे काले च सम्प्राप्ते Was हरिदॆवतम् sem विधिवत् पात्रे न्यस्तं कामधुगक्षयम्। ५ ।
देवर्षिपितृभूतेभ्व आत्मने स्वजनाय च । अन्नं संविभजन्यङ्येत् wa तत् पुरुषात्मकम् । ६ |

* This is corroborated by the Sruti text `पुन्च्वे =

amen’ (the self is manifest in a greater degree in human kind).

