~~

Dis. 1] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA

BORA HRY 38 व 33 ENE He He BEM BC AAT BENE ROG BeBe BE MME VER OME Hee BOT REN MHA MEN WEE Be eR RRR Ke Be RR ROR ७७७ .७.८.३.७.७.७.७६.३.६ १ .
जाप्तर्त्त

भक्तिरुवाच
we परीक्षिता राज्ञा स्थापितो ह्यशुचि: कलि: । प्रवृत्ते तु wet सर्वसार: कुत्र गतो महान् । ६३॥
करुणापरेण हरिणाप्यधर्म: कथमीक्ष्यते। इमं मे संहझायं छिन्धि त्वद्वाचा सुखितास्म्यहम् । ६४॥

Bhakti said : How was the impious Kali actually given an abode (here)? and the age of
Kali having set in, how did the valuable essence of all substances disappear? (63) How is
(all this) unrighteousness too tolerated by the all-gracious Sri Hari ? (Pray,) resolve this
doubt of mine. | feel gratified by your words. (64)

ARG Jara
यदि पृष्टस्त्वया बाले प्रेमत: श्रवणं Hel ad वक्ष्यामि a भद्रे wane a गमिष्यति । ६५॥
यदा मुकुन्दो भगवान् क्ष्मां त्यक्त्वा स्वपदं गत: । तद्दिनात्कलिरायात: सर्वसाधनबाधक: । ६६॥
दृष्टो दिग्विजये wm दीनवच्छरणं गत: । न मया मारणीयोऽयं सारङ्ग इव सारभुक Ie!
यत्फलं नास्ति are न योगेन aati acme लभते सम्यक्कलौ केशवकीर्तनात् । ६८॥
एकाकारं कलिं दृष्टा सारवत्सारनीरसम्।विष्णुरात: स्थापितवान् कलिजानां सुखाय च । ६९1

Narada said : Since | have been questioned by you, O young lady! listen with love, | shall
tell you everything, O blessed one! and your faint- heartedness will disappear. (65) From the
(very) day Lord Sri Krsna (the Besto'ver of Liberation) left this earth and ascended to His own
realm, the age of Kali, which balks all spiritual endeavours, set in. (66) Seen by the king
(Pariksit) in the course of his conquest of the (four) quarters, the spirit of the Kali age (in a
living form) like a wretch sought the king for protection. The king, who like a black bee took
the essence of things, thought within himself, "He (certainly) does not deserve to be killed
by me; (for) in the Kali age one fully secures through the (mere) chanting of the names and
glory of SriKrsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva) the fruit which cannot be attained
through askesis, concentration of mind or (even) through deep meditation. (67-68) Therefore
perceiving the Kali age to be valuable in (this) one respect, though devoid of substance (in
all other senses), Pariksit (the protege of Lord Visnu) with a view to securing the happiness
(blessedness) of those born in Kali allowed the spirit of it to stay. (69)

कुकर्माचरणात्सार: सर्वतो निर्गतोऽधुना । पदार्था: संस्थिता भूमौ बीजहीनास्तुषा यथा 1901 `
विप्रैर्भागवती वार्ता गेहे गेहे जने जने। कारिता कणलोभेन कथासारस्ततो गत: 121
अत्युग्रभूरिकर्माणो नास्तिका रौरवा जना: । तेऽपि तिष्ठन्ति तीर्थेषु तीर्थसारस्ततो गत: 1021
कामक्रोधमहालोभतृष्णाव्याकुलचेतस: । तेऽपि तिष्ठन्ति तपसि तप-सारस्ततो गत: 1931
मनसश्चाजयाल्लोभाद्दम्भात्पाखण्डसंश्रयात् ।दशास्त्रानभ्यसनाच्चैव ध्यानयोगफलं गतम् ।७४॥
पण्डितास्तु कलत्रेण रमन्ते महिषा इव । पुत्रस्योत्पादने दक्षा अदक्षा मुक्तिसाधने oul
न fe वैष्णवता ga सम्प्रदायपुर:सरा । एवं प्रलयतां प्राप्तो वस्तुसार: स्थले BS IE!
अयं तु युगधर्मो fe ada कस्य दूषणम्। अतस्तु पुण्डरीकाक्ष: aed निकटे स्थित: ।७७।
Due to the practice of evil deeds the substance has disappeared from everything in the
present age. Like the husk devoid of grain (all) things on earth stand divested of their
substance. Out of greed for food-grains the story of the Lord is repeated by Brahmanas in

every home and to all and sundry; hence the value of the story is gone. (70-71) Even those
perpetrating most cruel deeds of various kinds and unbelieving men and savages have taken
