222 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 28

२२२२ ITAMCA MANET ETERS SESE HEE 339१ 3 TEAC EEE EER EE EE hth eine aah

$riSuka continued : Thus propitiated (by Varuna), Lord StiKrsna, the Supreme Ruler
(of the universe), returned (to Vraja), taking His father (with Him) and bringing joy to His
relations. (9) Astonished indeed to witness the immense fortune of Varuna, which was
something that he had never seen before. as well as the submissiveness of the people of
that realm towards Sri Krsna, Nanda spoke about it to his kinsfolk. (10) Believing Him to
be God (Himself), they too thought with an eager mind, O Pariksit, "Would the supreme
Lord were to translate us to His own (divine) realm as wel! as to His imperceptible
(transcendent) state (known by the name of Brahma) !" (11) Having come to know by
Himself the aforesaid wish of His own people, the said all-perceiving Lord graciously
pondered thus with a view to accomplishing their desire:—(12) "Revolving through
(diverse) states of existence, (both) high and low, in this (material) world under the force
of ignorance (in the shape of identification with the body etc.), desire (born of such
ignorance) and actions (prompted by such desire), indeed, this embodied soul is unable
to realize its essential character." (13) Reflecting thus, the highly merciful Lord Sri Hari
revealed to the cowherds His own (divine) realm (viz., Vaikuntha), lying beyond Prakrti and
(before that) His (transcendent) state called Brahma, which is (absolute) truth, (pure)
consciousness, infinite, self-effulgent and eternal, and which sages realize only when the
three Gunas are transcended and when they have been fully composed. (14-15) Trans-
ported (first) to the all absorbing state of Brahma and steeped in it, and eventually lifted out
of it by Sri Krsna (as out of a trance), they beheld the (divine) realm of the same Brahma
(crystallized in the form of Lord Visnu) by the grace of the same Krsna because of whom
Akrira perceived that divine abode (on another occasion) in the past.* (16) Nanda and
others were indeed exhilarated with supreme ecstasy to behold the said realm as well as
Sri Krsna being panegyrized there by the (four) Vedas (in living forms), and felt greatly
amazed (to find Sri Krsna in their midst once again as before). (17)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of

the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Sambhita.

wetter
PIES Sry

* Vide Oiscourse XXXIX below.
