668 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 -

Rehr REAR Ee HEAT ETHEL ERE SEALER APL LELS ASHES CEN ARAL RER EEO AHHH

born a veritable thorny bush in the forest of Diti's sons, who are like so many sandal trees.
(Nay,) the urchin has served as a handle to the axe, in the form of Visnu, cutting at the root
of that forest." (17) Thus intimidating him with threats and various other expedients, the
preceptor taught Prahrada only texts dealing with the first three objects of human pursuit
(viz., earthly possessions, gratification of the senses and religious merit). (18) Thinking that
the boy had mastered the four expedients worth knowing (viz., expostulation, gift, coercion
and sowing seeds of dissension), the preceptor later on ushered the boy, when he had been
washed and adorned by the mother, into the presence of Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the
Daityas). (19) Greeting with benedictions the child fallen at his feet, the demon kept him
folded in his arms for a long time and derived supreme gratification (thereby). (20) (Then)
placing the infant on his lap and smelling its head (out of affection) and bathing it with tears
(of joy), he spoke as follows to the boy, whose face was beaming (with delight), O

Yudhisthira. (21)
हिरण्यकरिपुरुवाच
प्रह्मादानूच्यतां तात स्वधीतं किञ्चिदुत्तमम्। कालेनैतावताऽऽयुष्मन् यदशिक्षद् गुरोर्भवान् । २२।
Hiranyakasipu said : Prahrada dear, repeat (to me) something excellent that you
have learnt from your teacher all this time, O long-lived one, and which you have fully
mastered.(22)
ele उवाच

श्रवणं कीर्तनं विष्णो: स्मरणं पादसेवनम्।अर्चनं वन्दनं दास्यं सख्यमात्मनिवेदनम् 123!

इति पुंसार्पिता विष्णौ भक्तिश्चेन्नवलक्षणा। क्रियते भगवत्यद्धा तन्मन्येऽधीतमुत्तम् । २४॥

निशम्यैतत्सुतवचो हिरण्यकरशिपुस्तदा । गुरुपुत्रमुवाचेदं रुषा प्रस्फुरिताधर: ।२५॥

seen किमेतत्ते faust श्रयतासता। stent ग्राहितो बालो मामनादृत्य दुर्मते ।२६॥

सन्ति ह्यसाधवो लोके दुर्मैत्राह्छद्मवेषिण: । तेषामुदेत्यघं are रोग: पातकिनामिव । २७॥

Prahrada replied : (1) Tohear the names, praises and stories of Lord Visnu and (2) chant
them, (3) to remember Him (as well as His names and stories), (4) to wait upon Him, (5) to
offer worship and (6) salutation to Him, (7) to dedicate one’s actions to Him, (8) to cultivate
friendship with Him and (9) to offer one’s own body as well as one's dependants and
belongings to Him—if Devotion marked by these nine features is practised by a man as
something already offered direct to Lord Visnu, | reckon that (such Devotion) tobe the highest
(form of) learning. (23-24) Hearing this observation of his son (Prahrada), Hiranyakasipu
then spoke to the son of his preceptor (Sukracarya) as follows, his lips quivering through
rage:— (25) "O vile Brahmana, having espoused the enemy's cause and disregarding me
what is this nonsense that the child has been taught by your wicked self, O fool ? (26) Indeed
there are in this world impious souls who have assumed a deceptive garb and whose
friendship is of a vicious (most unreliable) type. Like the malady* of the sinful, their mischief
comes to light (only) at the proper time.” (27)
गुरुपुत्र उवाच
न मत्प्रणीतं न परप्रणीते सुतो वदत्येष तवेन्द्रशत्रो ।
नैसर्गिकीयं मतिरस्य राजन् नियच्छ मन्युं कददा: स्म मा A ।२८॥

* We find the following Smrti-text quoted in the commentary of Sridhara Swami :-
ब्रह्महा TIT स्यात् सुराप: श्यावदन्तक:। स्वर्णहारी तु PTS दुश्चमां गुरुतल्पग:॥
"The murderer of a Brahmana suffers (in a future incamation) from the fell disease of consumption; a (habitual) drunkard

comes to have discoloured teeth; he who has (ever) stolen gold comes to have diseased nails and he who has violatea the
bed of his own teacher is afflicted with leprosy (after he has suffered tortures in hell and is born again as a human being)."
