Dis. 11] BOOK SEVEN | 707
SO ret etre eee ee ee ease eee eet eee ee eet eee ee fit int Strict teint ih ieinintcicticiinirtrivke tek
Hitweiretehnnnnhrnet es ke weeeNREEeEeREetREhnneMeANeEeEeRee ee nERnEEReEEEEEEEe

Study (of the scriptures and so on (viz., performance of sacrifices and charity, which along
with study are of an obligatory nature; and three more—viz., teaching, officiating as a priest
at sacrifices, and receiving gifts from those whose earnings are free from blemish—which
are recommended as a means of subsistence and are therefore not obligatory* ) are the six
duties of a Brahmana. Non-acceptance of gifts is the rule for the other one (viz., the Ksatriya,
ora member of the warrior class, who comes next in order to the Brahmana and is allowed
to earn his livelihood by the other two means, viz., teaching and officiating as a priest at
sacrifices in distresst. Of course, he is free to practise these otherwise than as a means of
subsistence). Maintenance is to be sought by a Ksatriya, protecting the people, optionallyt
by recovering taxes and fines from his subjects other than a Brahmana (who is ordinarily
exempted from such taxes and fines). (14) A Vaigya (a member of the trading and agricultural
Classes) as a matter of fact should make his living by agriculture, breeding of cattle, trade and
usury* and should always follow the lead of the Brahmana race. Service to the twice-born
classes has been enjoined upon the Sidra (a member of the labouring and artisan classes)
and service to his master has been ordained as his means of subsistence too. (1 5)

वार्ता विचित्रा झालीनयायावरशिलोञ्छनम्। विप्रवृत्तिश्चतुर्धेय श्रेयसी चोत्तरोत्तरा ।१६॥
जघन्यो नोन्तमां वृत्तिमनापदि भजेन्नर: । ऋते राजन्यमापत्सु सर्वेषामपि ada: ।१७॥
ma जीवेत मृतेन प्रमृतेन वा । सत्यानृताभ्याँ जीवेत न wae कथञ्चन । १८।
Tapa प्रोक्तममृतं यदयाचितम् । मृतं तु नित्ययाच्ञा स्यात् प्रमृतं कर्षणं स्मृतम् ।१९॥
wart तु वाणिज्यं श्ववृत्तिर्नीचसेवनम् | वर्जयेत् at सदा fast राजन्यश्च जुगुप्सिताम् |
सर्ववेदमयो विप्र: सर्वदेवमयो FW: 1201
(1) Occupation of various kinds (such as agriculture, breeding of cattle, trade and so on
as enumeratedin verse 15), (2) accepting gifts without the impudence of asking, (3) begging
foodgrains daily (lit., the life of a vagrant mendicant) and (4) gathering ears of corn left by the
owner while reaping the harvest or gleaning foodgrains lying scattered ina grain-market after
the heaps have been sold off or removed—this is the fourfold means of livelihood sanctioned
fora Brahmana (one belonging to the priestly class). (Of these four,) again, each succeeding
one is preferable (to the preceding). (16) With the exception of a Ksatriya, a man belonging
to alower grade should not adopt a higher vocation except in distress. (Of course, a Ksatriya
may adopt® the means of livelihood of a Brahmana other than accepting gifts made by
another.) In (times of) distress, however, all sorts of vocations are open to all without
distinction. (17) One may live by (what are known as) Rta and Amrta or (even) by Mrta and
Pramrta. One may (also) live by Satyanrta, but under no circumstance by Swavritti (a dog's

eee
* Vide Manusmrti, which says :—
`षण्णां तु कर्मणामस्य त्रीणि कर्माणि जीविका। यजनाध्वापने चैव विशुद्धाच्च प्रतिग्रह:॥
+ Vide verse 17 below.
ई Akingis entitled to receive voluntary presents from his subjects and tocollect periodically tributes from feudatory chiefs
ङ an acknowledgment of submission on their part or as price of peace or protection. He is also regarded as perfectly justified
= €xiending his dominion by conquering other territories as a preliminary for the performance of a Rajasiya Sacrifice. If heis
able to meet his expenditure from these sources, he has been allowed the alternative of filling his coffers byrecovering taxes `
Som his subjects and fines by way of penalty from offenders. Thisis the force of the particle a1’ In the above verse, which has
=ccordingly been translated as ‘optionally’. An ordinary Ksatriya is also permitted to live by use of arms.
* The significance of the term ‘Varia, has been explained elsewhere in the following couplet :—
कृषिवाणिज्यगोरक्षा: कुसीदं तुर्यमुच्यते। वार्तां चतुर्विधा aa

$ Vide verse 14 above.

