156 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 .

erie ne aid iit ta teat tit ieee ie ere dre eee e ee HOSTESS ASH ARETE TEER ARTE EE

सि nit eH eee SHH MoT ene Tere sees eer erererereeowesaeeraewree—

O Primal Lord, we, who are ever Yours, have been created by You one after another with the
help of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), that constitute our very nature, with the
intention of evolving the universe. Yet, (possessed as we are ofa diversified nature) we are
all disjoined (independent of one another and hence incapable of taking concerted action).
That is why we are unable to (evolve and) present to You the universe, which will serve as
a means of carrying on Your future pastimes. (47) Therefore, O Unborn Lord, devise some
means whereby we may be enabled to (create the universe and) offer our tribute to You in
its entirety at the allotted time and whereby we may also derive our sustenance and all the
beings (that come hereafter) may (be securely placed and) get their food without any let or
hindrance, offering their tribute to You as well as to us. (48) You, the immutable Ancient
Person alone, are the prime cause of us gods as well as of the other evolutes. It was You
again, O Unborn Lord, who (of yore) placed the seed in the form of the conscious Jiva in the
womb of Your energy, Maya, whois the source of the three Gunas as wellas ofall activity.(49)
O Supreme Spirit, what shall we, the deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and others, do
for You, since that is the purpose for which we are born ? OLord, we depend on Your grace
alone: therefore, for success in the work of creation, pray confer on us Your divine vision
(insight) along with Your creative energy. (50)

Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

Sek Pat Pak ह
rete

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
Appearance of the Cosmic Body
ऋषिरुवाच

इतितस्यांस्वज्ञक्तोनांसतीर्व्यस:।प्नसुप्तलोक्ताञाणांक्सिण्यगतिमॊश्वां:।श्।
कालसंज्ञां तदा देवीं बिभ्रच्छक्तिमुरुक्रम:। त्रयोविंशतितत्त्वानां गणं युगपदाविशत् । २ |
सोऽनुप्रविष्टो भगवांश्चेष्टारूपेण तं गणम् fit संयोजयामास सुप्तं कर्म प्रबोधयन् । ३ ।
प्रबुद्धकर्मा दैवेन त्रयोविंशतिको गण: । प्रेरितोऽजनयत्स्वाभिर्मात्राभिरधिपूरुषम् । ४ ।
परेण विशता स्वस्मिन्मात्रया विश्वसृग्गण: । चुक्षोभान्योन्यमासाद्य यस्मिँल्लोकाश्चराचरा: । ५ |
froma: स पुरुष: सहस्रपरिवत्सरान्।आण्डकोश उवासाप्सु सर्वसत्त्वोपबृंहित: । ६ |
a वै विश्वसृजां wif देवकर्मात्महाक्तिमान्। विबभाजात्मनाऽऽत्मानमेकधा een त्रिधा । ७ ।
एष ह्यलेषसत्त्वानामात्माँगर परमात्मन: | आद्योऽवतारो यत्रासौ भूतग्रामो विभाव्यते । ८ |

साध्यात्म: साधिदैवश्च साधिभूत इति त्रिधा । विराद् प्राणो cafes एकधा हृदयेन च । ९ ।

The sage Maitreya said: When the almighty Lord saw that His own powers (the Mahat-
tattva and the rest) were unable to start the work of creating the universe, because there was
no harmony among them, He assumed His divine potency known by the name of Kala (Time)
and simultaneously entered the twenty-three categories (viz., the Mahat-tattva, the Ego, the
five senses of perception, the five organs of action andthe mind, the five subtle elements and
the five gross elements). (1-2) Having entered these categories, that stood disconnected, He
