Dis. 4] BOOK. THREE 149

,.३.३.३.३.३.३.७.७..४..३..३..३,३.३.३.७.३.&&३.३८३..३.३..३..३.७..७..३..३.१७८३. EES 8 CREE EE HE Be TM ERE ER TT BRE

SEF STG
aq ते तत्त्वसंराध्य ऋषि: कौषारवोऽन्ति मे । साक्षाद्भगवताऽऽदिष्टो मर्त्यलोकं जिहासता 1261
Uddhava replied : For the knowledge of that truth you should wait upon the sage

Maitreya (son of Kusaru), who was personally instructed in this behalf by the Lord in my
presence, while He was about to leave this mortal world. (26)

श्रीरुक उवाच
-इति सह fag विश्वमूर्तर्गुणकथया सुधया प्लावितोरुताप: |
क्षणमिव पुलिने यमस्वसुस्तां समुषित औपगविर्निशां ततोऽगात् । २७॥

Sri Suka continued : Relieved of his great agony (of separation from the Lord) by the
nectar-like talk that he thus had with Vidura on the virtues of Lord Sri Krsna (the Soul of
the universe), Uddhava (the son of Upagu) passed that night as if it were a moment on the
bank of the Yamuna (the younger sister of god Yama") and departed thence (early next

morning). (27)
राजोवाच

निधनमुपगतेषु बृष्णिभोजेष्रधिरथयूथपयूथपेषु मुख्य: ।
स a कथमवशिष्टं seat agit तत्यज आकृतिं त्र्यधीरा: 12!

The king asked : When even the topmost generals of the car-warriors among the Vrsnis
and Bhojas had met their end (as a result of the imprecation pronounced by the sages), nay,
when Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) Himself, the Supreme Ruler even of the three lords of the universe,
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva), had to leave His body (in the eyes of the world), howis it that
Uddhava alone, the foremost of those generals, survived ? (28)

श्रीगुक उवाच
ब्रह्मशापापदेशेन कालेनामोघवाञ्छित: । संह्रत्य स्वकुलं नूनं त्यक्ष्यन्देहमचिन्तयत् 1281
अस्माल्लोकादुपरते at ज्ञानं मदाश्रयम्।अर्हत्युद्धव एवाद्धा सम्प्रत्यात्मवतां at 1301
नोद्ध्वोऽण्वपि मन्न्यूनो यद्गुणैर्नार्दित: प्रभु:। अतो मद्वयुने लोकं ग्राहसन्निह तिष्ठतु ae!
एवं त्रिलोकगुरुणा सन्दिष्ट- हाब्दयोनिना । बदर्याश्रममासाद्य हरिमीजे समाधिना 1321
विदुरोऽप्युद्धवाच्छुत्वा कृष्णस्य परमात्मन: । क्रीडयोपात्तदेहस्य कर्माणि इलाघितानि च ।३३॥
wud च तस्यैवं धीराणां धैर्यवर्धनम्। अन्येषां दुष्करतरं पशूनां विक्लवात्मनाम् । ३४॥
आत्मानं च कुरुश्रेष्ठ कृष्णेन मनसेक्षितम्।ध्यायन् wa भागवते ete प्रेमविह्वल: ।३५॥
ater: कतिभि: fag अहोभिर्भरतर्षभ: । प्रापद्यत स्व:सरितं aa मित्रासुतो aft: । ३६॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे विदुरोद्धवसंवादे चतुर्थोऽध्याय: ।४।

Sri Suka replied : When Sri Krsna, whose desire never remains unfulfilled, had
exterminated His own race through the instrumentality of Death, who appeared in the shape
of the Brahmanas' execration, and when He was about to cast off His body (in the eyes of
the world), He reflected thus:—(29) "Now, when | shall have departed from this world,
Uddhava alone, the foremost among those who have attained Self-Realization, is really
qualified to receive the knowledge concerning Me. (30) Uddhava is in no wise inferior to Me,

inasmuch as He has mastered his self and is never perturbed by the objects of sense. So
let him remain on earth, imparting to the world the knowledge regarding Me." (31) Instructed

* The deity presiding over the sacred river Yamuna was begotten along with the god Yama by the sun-god. Hence she
is spoken of as a sister of Yama. Her hand was later on won by Lord Sri Krsna (vide Srimad Bhagavata X, lviii.17—23).
