Dis. 79 ] BOOK TEN 449

STREETER ETERS LET DEH HARARE # आज्जन्र श्र AHHH HEDERHH 9899 9४ # MERE

bring you purification from this sin. (40)

Thus ends the seventy-eighth discourse entitled " A Prelude to the Destruction of Balwaia,"
forming part of the narrative of Baladeva in the latter half of Book
Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Hatters

Discourse LXXIX

An account of Balarama's Pilgrimage
श्रीगुक उवाच
aa: पर्वण्युपावृत्ते प्रचण्ड: पांसुवर्षण: । भीमो वायुरभूद् राजन् पूयगन्धस्तु सर्वश: । १ ।
ततोऽमेध्यमयं वर्षं बल्वलेन विनिर्मितम्। अभवद् यज्ञशालायां सोऽन्वदृश्यत शूलधृक । २ ।
4 विलोक्य gee भिन्नाञ्जनचयोपमम् । तप्तताम्रशिखाङ्मश्रुं देष्टोग्रभ्रुकुटीमुखम् । ३ |
सस्मार मुसलं राम: परसैन्यविदारणम्।हलं च दैत्यदमनं ते तूर्णमुपतस्थतु: | ४ |
त्तमाकृष्य हलाग्रेण sas गगनेचरम्। मुसलेनाहनत् क्रुद्धो WN RO बल: । ५ |
सोऽपतद् भुवि निर्भिन्नललाटोऽसृक HARE मुञ्चन्नार्तस्वरं det यथा वज्रहतोऽरुण: । ६ |
aqe wat रामं प्रयुज्यावितथाशिष: । अभ्यषिञ्चन् महाभागा gan विबुधा यथा । ७ |
वैजयन्तीं ददुर्मालां श्रीधामाम्लानपङ्कजाम् । रामाय वाससी दिव्ये दिव्यान्याभरणानि च । ८ ।

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, on the next full-moon day a violent storm broke over
the place, covering all with dust and bringing the foul odour of pus from all sides. Next, there
was a shower of urine and faeces on the sacrificial ground, caused by Balwala, who himself
afterwards appeared with a trident in his hand. (1-2) Possessed of a dark gigantic body, he
looked like a heap of soot. His hair, moustaches and beard had the colour of red-hot copper
and his face with protruding teeth and (contracted) eyebrows looked most terrible. Seeing
the demon, Balarama thought of His celebrated pestle, which shatters the columns of the
enemy's army, and His well-known plough, which subdues the demons; and both these
weapons instantaneously presented themselves before Him. (3-4) With the end of His
plough Balarama drew down Balwala coursing in the air, and full of rage struck that (sworn)
enemy of the Brahmanas on the head with His pestle. (5) With his forehead split open the
demon, bleeding profusely, fell on the ground, uttering a helpless cry, and looked like a
mountain peak struck down with lightning and ejecting red streams (of molten character). (6)
The blessed sages (of Naimisaranya) applauded Balarama (for this action), pronounced
their unfailing benedictions on Him and sprinkled (holy) waters over His head even as the
gods sprinkled water over their ruler Indra on his having killed the demon Vrtra. (7) (Then)

they presented Balarama with a pair of excellent pieces of cloth and ornaments anda
beautiful Vaijayanti garland of never-fading lotuses. (8)

au तैरभ्यनुज्ञात: कौशिकीमेत्य ब्राह्मणै: । स्नात्वा सरोवरमगाद् यत: सरयुरास्रवत्। ९ |
अनुस्रोतेन ae प्रयागमुपगम्य स:।स्नात्वा सन्तर्प्य देवादीन् जगाम पुलहाश्रमम् | Rol
गोमतीं गण्डकीं स्नात्वा विपाशां tot saga: । गयां गत्वा पितॄनिष्टा गङ्खासागरसङ्गमे । ११॥
