230 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30

BESO EOR SUS ore BORO EEE AE ER SIO So rss rt) grrr errr Sr SSSI 8 seein sors
ae
q लता बाहूनप्यार्लिष्टा वनस्पते: । नूनं तत्करजस्पृष्ठटा बिभ्रत्युत्पुलकान्यहो ।१३॥

“0 Aswattha (the holy fig tree), 0 Plakga, 0 Nyagrodha (the banyan tree) ! was the
Darling of Nanda—who has gone (this way) captivating our mind by His (sidelong) glances
accompanied with endearing smiles—seen by you ? (5) O Kurabaka (a species of
amaranth), ASoka, Naga, Punnaga and Campaka trees ! did Sri Krsna (the younger Brother
of Balarama), whose (very) smile takes away the pride of angry women, go this side ? (6)
O blessed Tulasi (holy basil), to whom the feet of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) are (so)
dear, was that immortal Lord, most beloved of you, seen by you bearing you (on His bosom
in a garland) alongwith swarms of bees ? (7) © Malati, O Mallika, 0 ati, O Yuthika ! was Sri
Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi) seen by you causing delight to you by the touch of His hand
while going (this way)? (8) O Cita (a particular variety of mango trees), Priyala, Panasa (the
jack tree), Asana, Kovidara, Jambu (the rose-apple tree), Arka (the sun-plani), Bilva (the
wood-apple tree), Bakula, Amra (the common mango), Kadamba and Nipa (a variety of
Kadamba) trees and whatever other trees stand on the bank of the Yamuna (and as such
are expected to speak the bare truth), (pray) point out to us—whose mind is no longer with
us (having been lured away by Sri Krsna)—the way to reach Sri Krsna, born as you are for
the good of others. (9) Oh, what austerity, O Earth, was performed by you in that with the
blades of grass and sprouts etc., (which look like bristling hair on your body) you appear
thrilled with joy at the touch of the feet of Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva)?
Has this joy been caused by (the touch of) the Lord's feet (just now) or is it due to your having
been bestridden by the Lord with wide strides (during His descent as Vamana or the Divine
Dwarf) or (again) by His embrace (even earlier) in the form of Varaha (the Divine Boar) ? (10)
O she-deer, did Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) come over here in the company of His darling
bringing excessive joy to the eyes of you all by His (charming) limbs, O friend ? (For) here
comes the fragrance of the garland of jasmine flowers worn on the person of Sri Krsna (the
Protector of His race), and tinged with the saffron on the bosom of His lady-love at the time
of her embrace. (11) Holdinga lotus (in His right hand) and resting His (other) arm on the (left)
shoulder of His darling and being followed by swarms of black bees attracted by Tulasi
flowers (inter-woven in His wreath of wild blossoms) and blinded by intoxication (caused by
their sweet fragrance), did Sri Krsna (Balarama’s Younger Brother) hail your greetings by His
glances surcharged with love, while sauntering here? (12) Make enquiries of these creepers
(too, O friends); (for) lo! even though having encircled the arms {in the shape of boughs )of
(their husband in the form of) a tree, they have surely been touched by His nails (while
plucking their flowers), as (is evident from the fact that) they exhibit a thrill of joy (in the form
of sprouts). (13) -

इत्युन्पत्तवचोगाप्य: कृष्णान्वेषणकातरा: | लीला भगवतस्तास्ता ह्यनुचक्रुस्तदात्मिका: । १४॥
कस्याश्चित् पूतनायन्त्या: कृष्णायन्त्यपिबत् स्तनम् | तोकायित्वा रुदत्यन्या पदाहञ्छकटायतीम् । १५॥
दैत्यायित्वा जहारान्यामेका कृष्णार्भभावनाम् । रिङ्यामास काप्यङ्घ्री कर्षन्ती घोषनि:स्वनै: । १६
कृष्णरामायिते द्वे तु गोपायन्त्यश्च काश्चन | वत्सायतीं sha चान्या तत्रैका तु बकायतीम् । १७
आहूय दूरगा यट्वत् कृष्णस्तमनुकुर्वतीम् So] क्वणन्तीं क्रीडन्तीमन्या: ज्ञंसन्ति साध्विति । १८॥
कस्यांचित् स्वभुजं न्यस्य चलन्त्याहापरा ननु । कृष्णोऽहं uaa गतिं ललितामिति तन्मना: 1१९1
मा भैष्ट वातवर्षाभ्यां तत्राणं विहितं मया । इत्युक्त्वैकेन हस्तेन यतन्त्युन्निदधेऽम्बरम् ।२०॥
आरुह्यैका पदाऽऽक्रम्य शिरस्याहापरां नृप । दुष्टाहे गच्छ जातोऽहं खलानां Aq दण्डधृक् । २१।

