Dis. 8] BOOK TEN 135

AOR IOUT शा यशा गक ROI IG Eee DiI ion Reon tote ton ne tenon a emai eee ie

aed grrentataparcesterarasia तदबला: प्रगृहीतपुच्छै: ।
बर्त्सरिंतस्तत उभावनुकृष्यमाणो प्रेक्षन्त्य उज्झितगृहा जहषुर्हसन्त्य: । २४।
{ + क्रीडापरावतिचलौ wad निषेद्धुम् ।
गृह्याणि कर्तुमपि aa न तज्जनन्यौ Band आपतुरलं मनसोऽनवस्थाम् । २५॥

Not long afterwards, Balarama and Kesava (Sri Krsna) began to sport in Gokula going
about on hands and knees. (21) Moving briskly on the muddy grounds of Vraja dragging both
their feet behind in a (most) charming way—the tiny bells of Their anklets and girdle making
a tinkling noise and Their mind delighted to hear their sound—and following any passer-by
(to some distancé), the two Boys would (soon) return to Their mothers like innocent and
terrified babes (when the passer-by would turn round and look at Them and They discovered
him to be a stranger). (22) Folding in their arms their Sons—who looked charming with mud,
that served to beautify Their person as a paint—and giving Them suck, Their two mothers,
whose breasts were overflowing with milk due to their (motherly) affection, experienced
ecstatic joy indeed to behold Their countenance bright with a winning smile and small teeth
(even) as They sucked their breasts with relish. (23) When the two Boys were old enough
to be engaged in boyish sports, (so) captivating to the eyes of young women, the latter would
then feel delighted to gaze on Them both being dragged behind hither and thither in the
interior of Vraja by calves whose tails were tightly seized by Them, and stood laughing
leaving their homestead. (24) When Their mothers did not succeed in restraining their most
restless Sons—absorbed as They were in play—from horned animals and those having
sharp teeth, fire, sword, water, birds and thorns, nor could they attend to their domestic
duties, they would experience a great distraction of mind. (25)

कालेनाल्पेन राजर्षे राम: Heng गोकुले । अघृष्टजानुभि: पद्भिर्विचक्रमतुरञ्जसा । २६॥
ततस्तु भगवान् कृष्णो वयस्यैर्व्रजबालकै: | सहरामो awrite चिक्रीडे जनयन् मुदम् ।२७॥
कृष्णस्य गोप्यो रुचिरं वीक्ष्य कौमारचापलम् । uae: किल तन्मातुरिति era: समागता: । २८।
वत्सान् मुञ्चन् क्कचिदसमये क्रोशसंजातहास: स्तेयं स्वाद्वत्यथ दधि पय: कल्पितै: स्तेययोगै: ।
`भर्कान् भोक्ष्यन् विभजति स चेन्नात्ति भाण्डं भिनत्ति द्रव्यालाभे स गृहकुपितो यात्युपक्रोर्य तोकान् । २९॥
हस्ताग्राह्ये रचयति विधिं पीठर्कद्वैलळूरब्रल]द्यै।द्देछद्रं ह्यन्तर्निहितवयुन: शिक्यभाण्डेषु तद्वित् ।
arm धृतमणिगणं स्वाङ्गमर्थप्रदीपं ae aren यर्हि गृहकृत्येषु सुव्यग्रचित्ता: 1301
एवं धाष्टर्यान्युशाति कुरुते मेहनादीनि are स्तेयोपायैर्विरचितकृति: सुप्रतीको यथाऽऽस्ते |
इत्थं स्रीभि: सभयनयनश्रीमुखालोकिनीभिर्व्यख्यातार्था प्रहसितमुखी न ह्युपालब्धुमेच्छत् ।३१।
After 8 short time, O royal sage, Balarama and Sri Krsna began to move about with ease
in Gokula on Their feet without rubbing Their knees (against the ground). (26) Then, incourse
of time, Lord Sri Krsna. accompanied by Balarama, began to sport with the boys of Vraja of
His own age, bringing delight to the women of Vraja (thereby). (27) Gazing on the charming
boyish pranks of Sri Krsna, the cowherd women (of Vraja) called (at His residence) ina body
and actually spoke as follows to His mother, who was all ears:—(28) Occasionally
untethering the calves before time (when we are unwary, and thus allowing them to suck the
whole milk of their mothers) and with his risibility excited by scolding, your darling swallows
our tasteful curds and milk stolen through thieving devices contrived by Him. He (not only
quaffs them himself, but) deals them out in order to feed monkeys; and, if a monkey drinks

no more, he smashes the (very) jar (containing curds and milk). (Nay,) enraged with the
people of the house on getting no material (to eat), he departs setting the infants (of the

