198 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

dunn remnnnndinninninniinniniredtenrtrereekretetertererrreres rebate rere ee eee ew eee eee

ah waa महते देवायोग्राय मीढुषे। शिवाय न्यस्तदण्डाय धृतदण्डाय मन्यवे । ३४॥
स न: प्रसीदतां भामो भगवानुर्वनुग्रह: | व्याधस्याप्यनुकम्प्यानां स्रीणां देव: सतीपति: । ३५1
Diti said : Let not Lord Rudra, O hloy sage, who is the foremost of all beings as well as
the Ruler of spirits, destroy the seed in my womb because | have committed an offence
against Him. (33) Obeisance to the great god Siva, whois irresistible in power and who drives
away the agony of His devotees and bestows the desired blessings (on those who approach
him with a prayer), who is all-blissful (to His disinterested worshippers), who, though
perfectly non-violent by nature, yet wields the rod (for the wicked), and who is anger
personified (at the time of universal destruction). (34) May the almighty Lord Siva (the
Spouse of Sati), my brother-in-law who is extremely compassionate by nature, be gracious
unto us, women, who deserve the mercy even of the (hard-hearted) hunter. (35)

मैत्रेय sara
mated लोक्यामाशासानां saad । निवृत्तसन्ध्यानियमो भार्यामाह प्रजापति: 1361

Maitreya went on : Kasyapa, who had just finished his evening devotions, saw his wife
(Diti) shaking violently (with fear) and soliciting for her progeny the blessings of this as well
as of the other world, and spoke to her (as follows). (36)

करृयप उवाच
अप्रायत्यादात्मनस्ते दोषान्मौहूर्तिकादुत | मन्निदेशातिचारेण देवानां चातिहेलनात् । ३७1
भविष्यतस्तवाभद्रावभद्रे जाठराधमौ | लोकान् सपालांस्रींश्चण्डि मुहुराक्रन्दयिष्यत: । ३८
wit हन्यमानानां दीनानामकृतागसाम् aot निगृह्यमाणानां कोपितेषु महात्मसु । ३९1
तदा विश्वेश्वर: gel भगवाँल्लोकभावन: । हनिष्यत्यवतीर्यासौ यथाद्रीन् ङातपर्वधूक् 1¥0 |

Kagyapa said: Since your mind was impure (tainted with lust), the hour was unfavour-
able (for conception), you transgressed my command and (lastly) because you disregarded
the gods (Lord Rudra and His attendants), O impious woman, a pair of wicked and unworthy
sons will be born of you—sons that will make all the three worlds as well as their protectors
cry again and again, O irascible lady ! (37-38) When they proceed to kill helpless and
innocent creatures, violate the chastity of women and anger exalted souls, the Lord, who is
the Ruler of the universe and the Delighter of all the worlds, will be enraged and, coming

down to this world (from His divine Abode) will slay them even as Indra (the wielder of the
thunderbolt) struck down the mountains. (39-40)

agi भगवता साक्षात्सुनाभोदारबाहुना | sare पुत्रयोर्मह्यं मा क्रुद्धादब्राह्यणाद्दिभो ise |

न ब्रह्मदण्डदग्धस्य न भूतभयदस्य च । नारकाश्चानुगृह्णन्ति यां यां योनिमसो गत: 1४२
Diti said : | too would rather have my sons die at the hands of the Lord Himself, whose
long and mighty arm is adorned with the discus Sudargana. Let them not die under the curse
of an angered Brahmana, my lord. (41) Even the denizens of hell refuse to show any favour
to him whois consumed by the curse of a Brahmana, as well as to him who has been a terror
to living beings, no matter to whatever species of life he may be consigned after death. (42)

करुयप उवाच
Sea सद्य: प्रत्यवमर्शनात्। भगवत्युरुमानाच्च भवे मय्यपि चादरात् 183 |
पुत्रस्यैव तु पुत्राणां भवितैक: सतां मत: । गास्यन्ति यद्यश: YR भगवद्यशासा समम् IS!
