520 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 2

SERCO TET न न RMORT EE ROOTES LOE LHS THE ER ERODE ORME POT M ENTREE EEE न न सा न २

तेषां नव नवद्वीपपतयोऽस्य समन्तत: | कर्मतन्त्रप्रणेतार एकाशीतिर्दविजातय: 1221

नवाभवन् महाभागा मुनयो ह्यर्थशंसिन: । श्रमणा वातरशना आत्मविद्याविद्ञारदा: 1201

कविर्हरिरन्तरिक्ष sae: पिष्पलायन: । आविर्होत्रोऽथ द्रुमिलश्चमस: करभाजन: ।२१॥

a एते भगवद्रूपं fag सदसदात्मकम् | आत्मनोऽव्यतिरेकेण wea व्यचरन् महीम् 1221

अव्याहतेष्टगतय: सुरसिद्धसाध्यगन्धर्वयक्षनरकिन्नरनागलोकान् ।
मुक्ताश्चरन्ति मुनिचारणभूतनाथविद्याधरद्विजगवां भुवनानि कामम् । २३

a owe निमे: सत्रमुपजग्मुर्यदृच्छया | वितायमानमूषिभिरजनाभे महात्मन: ।२४॥

तान् ge सूर्यसंकाशान् महाभागवतान् नृप: । यजमानोऽग्नयो fam: ad एवोपतस्थिरे । २५॥

विदेहस्तानभिप्रेत्य नारायणपरायणान्। प्रीत: सम्पूजयाञ्चक्रे आसनस्थान् यथार्हत: 12 |

तान् रोचमानान् स्वरुचा ब्रह्मपुत्रोपमान् नव । पप्रच्छ परमप्रीत: प्रश्रयावनतो नृप: ।२७॥
Narada replied ; O Vasudeva (the foremost of the Yadavas) ! you have resolved well to
have inquired me about the virtues and duties that delight the Lord and purify all. (11) Heard
of or talked about, dwelt upon, accepted with reverence or (even) approved (when practised
by others), this righteous course purifies at once without doubt even those who are hostile
to the deities, nay, to all creatures. (12) । have been reminded by you today of the almighty
Lord Narayana, who is most auspicious and whose name, when heard or sung, brings
merit.(13) In this connection the wise narrate the following ancient legend embodying a
conversation between the sons of Rsabha and the high-souted Janaka (the king of the
Videhas).(14) Priyavrata, the well-known son of Swayambhuva Manu, had a son called
Agnidhra—of whom was born Nabhi, whose son was known as Rsabha. (15) The wise
declare that Rsabha descended (on earth) for popularizing the cult (of renunciation) leading
to Liberation, and that he had an element of Lord Vasudeva in him, He had a hundred sons,
who were (all) well-versed in the Vedas. (16) Of them the eldest son was Bharata. He was
really a devotee of Lord Narayana. It is after him that this wonderful land (sub-continent)
came to be known. (17) After enjoying the pleasures of this world he renounced it and left
his home and, worshipping Lord Hari through askesis for three (consecutive) births, finally
attained His state. (18) Out of those (ninety-nine younger brothers of Bharata), nine became
the rulers of the nine Dwipas surrounding Bharatavarsa. Andeighty-one became Brahmanas
and authors of treatises on ritual acts, while (the remaining) nine became highly blessed
sages. Having laboured in the domain of knowledge of Self, the latter propounded the highest
truth and, living naked, became adepts in spiritual knowledge. (19-20) Theirnames are: Kavi,
Hari, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa, and Karabhajana.(21)
These sages beheld the universe, gross as well as subtle (the cause and its mutations) as
identical with the Lord and without distinction from themselves, and wandered over the
earth.(22) They go wherever they like as their path is unobstructed. They freely range over
the regions of the gods, Siddhas, Sadhyas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, men, Kinnaras, Nagas,
ascetics, Caranas, Bhairavas, Vidyadharas, Brahmanas and cows. (Being liberated souls),
they had no attachment for any place or beings. (23) On one occasion they went of their own
accord to attend a sacrificial performance of King Nimi, an enlightened soul, which was being
conducted by Rsis in (that region of Jambudwipa called) Ajanabha (the old name of
Bharatavarsa). (24) O king (Pariksit), seeing those sages, effulgent like the sun and (so)
earnestly devoted to the Lord, the sacrificer (Nimi), the (sacred) fires and the Brahmanas
(who were performing the rites) all rose to welcome them. (25) Knowing them to be (great)
devotees of Lord Narayana, King Nimi felt (much) delighted (to see them). When they had
been seated, he duly worshipped them in the order of their seniority. (26) The nine sages

