Dis. 10 ] BOOK EIGHT ` 775
TRACK ASAT SOUSA EASES ESEE NERA NEES LETTER SSO TNT FARM ee MENERNMhEnENEE AEH poe

Thinking it unwise to offer nectar to the Asuras—as milk to serpents—both of whom are
ferocious by nature, Lord Acyuta did not give a share of it to them.(19) Providing separate
rows of Seats for the two races, Lord Visnu (the Ruler of the universe) seated them in those
“ows, each race in the midst of their own people. (20) Beguiling the Daityas by His winning
attentions, polite words and movements beside them with the jar held in His hands, He gave
‘he gods sitting at a distance to drink the nectar that prevents old age and death.(21)
3especting the promise made by them (that they would accept whatever might be done by
he girl), O king, the Asuras, who had bestowed their love on Her, kept quiet (also) because
hey abhorred (the very idea of ) wrangling with a woman. (22) Cherishing the utmost
iffection for Her and afraid of losing it, and restrained by excessive regard (shown to them
vy Her), they uttered nothing unpalatable.(23) Disguised in the garb of gods, and entering
he row of the gods, Swarbhanu (Rahu) drank the nectar and was pointed out by the moon-
106 and the sun-god (between whom he had surreptitiously placed himself).(24) Sri Hari
Ipped off his head by Hisdiscus (Sudarsana), which was sharp-edged asa razor, even while
ie was drinking the nectar, with the result that the not trunk, which had been touched by
ectar, dropped down (dead). (25) The head (of the demon), however, which was raised to
१18 position of an immortal (by coming in touch with nectar), Brahma (the birthless creator)
1ade a deity presiding over a planet, who actually assails the sun-god and the moon-god
n the new moon and the full moon respectively, cherishing enmity (towards them). (26)
Vhen the nectar was well-nigh consumed by the gods, Lord Sri Hari, the Protector of the
niverse, assumed His original form (Once more), while the Asura generals looked on. (27)
i this way the hosts of gods and demons differed in their result even though they worked
tthe same place and time, with the same means (Mount Mandara and the serpent Vasuki)
nd material (herbs and plants), and though (the nature of) their activity and intention (too)
ere (just) the same. Of the two parties, the gods easily obtained the reward in the shape
‘nectar due to their resorting to the dust of His lotus-feet, but not the Daityas (who did not
‘sort to that dust). (28) Whatever is done by men with (their) life, wealth, organs of action,
ind and speech with reference to (their) body, progeny and others having an eye to their
stinctive character is futile. That (however) which is done by those very means with an eye
their identity (divine nature) becomes fruitful; and it redounds to the benefit of all, even as
é watering of the roots (of a tree) tends to the nourishment of all its limbs.(29)

Thus ends the ninth discourse, comprised in the Story of the churning of the ocean
for the sake of nectar, in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

So facet १५० २६
CICISRE AEA PIS

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
Outbreak of hostilities between the gods and the Asuras
MIP उवाच
इति दानवदॆतेया नाविन्दन्नमृतं नृप । युक्ता: कर्मणि यत्ताश्च वासुदेवपराङ्मुखा: । १ ।
साधयित्वायृतंराजन्माययित्वास्वकान्तुरान्।पश्यतां सर्वभूतानां wat गरुडवाहन: । २ |
सपत्नानां परामृद्धिं दृष्टा ते दितिनन्दना: | अमृष्यमाणा उत्पेतुर्देवान्प्रत्युद्यतायुधा: । ३ ।
wa: सुरगणा: we सुधया पीतयैधिता: । प्रतिसंयुयुधु: शस्त्रैर्नारायणपदाश्रया: । ४ ।
