ॐ TA भगवते वासुदेवाय

—

॥ अथ प्रथमोऽध्याय:
The Glory of Srimad Bhagavata-Mahapurana

(Extracted from the Padma-Purana)

Discourse I:
A Dialogue between Narada and Bhakti (in a living form)

सच्चिदानन्दरूपाय विश्वोत्पत्त्सादिहेतवे | तापत्रयविनाशाय श्रीकृष्णाय वयं नुम: । १ ।

We sing the glory of Sri Krsna, who is all truth, all consciousness and all bliss, who is
responsible for the creation, sustenance and destruction of the universe, and who puts an
end to the threefold agony (viz., 1— that having its origin in one's own body or mind; 2— that
inflicted by other creatures and 3—that having its source in natural calamities). (1)

यं प्रव्रजन्तमनुपेतमपेतकृत्यं द्वैपायनो विरहकातर आजुहाव |
पुत्रेति तन्मयतया तरवोऽभिनेदुस्तं सर्वभूतहृदयं मुनिमानतोऽस्मि 121

When Vedavyasa (who was born in an island) saw his son (Suka) going away all alone
with the intention of leading the life of a recluse, even though the latter had not yet been
invested with the sacred thread and (accordingly) had no occasion to perform any secular
or religious duties, the sage felt distressed at (the thought of) his separation from the latter
and called out ."Hullo, my son!" (At that time) it was the trees that responded on his behalf,
filled as they were by his presence. | bow to that (juvenile) sage (Suka), who (being one with
the Universal Spirit) has access to the hearts of all created beings. (2)

नैमिषे सूतमासीनमभिवाद्य महामतिम्। कथामृतरसास्वादकुशल: waist, 1 ३ ।
Bowing to Sita of exalted wisdom, seated in Naimisaranya Saunaka, who was clever at
enjoying the flavour of the nectar-like stories connected with the Lord, said (as follows):—(3)

WAH उवाच
अज्ञानध्वान्तविध्वंसरकोटिसूर्यसमप्रभ । सूताख्याहि कथासारं मम कर्णरसायनम् । ४ |
भक्तिज्ञानविरागाप्तो विवेको वर्धते महान्। मायामोहनिरासश्च वैष्णवै: fad कथम्। ५ |
Be घोरे कलौ प्रायो जीवश्चासुरतां wa: | क्लेशाक्रान्तस्य तस्यैव wer fe परायणम् । ६ ।
Saat यद्भवेच्छेय: पावनानां च पावनम्।कृष्णप्राप्तिकरं Waa तद्बदाधुना । ७ |
चिन्तामणिर्लोकसुखं ae; स्वर्गसम्पदम्।प्रयच्छति qe: प्रीतो वैकुण्ठं योगिदुर्लभम्। ८ |
Saunaka submitted: O Sita, possessing (as you do) the splendour of millions of suns

capable of completely dispelling the darkness of ignorance, (kindly) narrate (to us) the best
part of the Lord's stories, which may prove as nectar to my ears. (4) How does the great
