AAS AMS ह व । सि
Dis. 5 ] त् BOOK TWO 103
कालं HA स्वभावं BA मायया Sa आत्मन् यदृच्छया प्राप्तं विबुभूषुरुपाददे 1281
arene, गुणव्यतिकर: परिणाम: स्वभावत:। कर्मणो जन्म महत: पुरुषाधिष्ठितादभूत् ।२२॥
Wea विकुर्वाणाद्रज:सत्त्वोपबृंहितात् । तम:प्रधानस्त्वभवद् द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियात्मक: 123 |

सोऽहङ्कार इति प्रोक्तो विकुर्वन् समभूत्तिधा । वैकारिकस्तेजसश्च तामसश्चेति यद्भिदा ।

द्रव्यशक्ति: क्रियाहाक्तिर्जानशाक्तिरिति प्रभो । २४
तामसादफ् भूतादेर्विकुर्वाणादभून्नभ: | तस्य ATA गुण: शब्दो लिङ्गं ae द्रष्टृदूश्ययो: ।२५॥
Intent upon becoming many (at the dawn of creation), the Lord of Maya assumed at will

(pressed into His service for the purpose of creation) by His own Maya (deluding potency),
Time, Karma (Destiny of the Jivas) and Swabhava (their innate disposition) that had already
existed in a latent form in His being. (21) Time disturbed the equilibrium of the three Gunas,
Swabhava transformed them and from Karma was evolved Mahat (the principle of cosmic
intelligence), all these functioning through the power of the Lord Himself. (22) From Mahat,
as it underwent transformation, dominated as it was by Rajas and Sattva, emanated an
evolute which was dominated by the element of Tamas (darkness, opacity) and was made
up of three factors—Dravya (substance), Jhana (intelligence) and Kriya (activity). (23) This
was known by the name of Ahankara and became threefold as it underwent transformation.
Its three varieties are Vaikarika (Sattvika), Taijasa (Rajasika) and Tamasa, which are
severally predominated, O Narada, by the force of Jnana, Kriya and Dravya. (24) From the
Tamasa Ahankara, the origin of the five gross elements, as it underwent transformation, was
evolved ether. Sabda (sound) is the subtle form as well as the distinctive characteristic of this
element; and it is sound which furnishes a clue to the seer and the seen.*(25)

नभसोऽथ विकुर्वाणादभूत् स्पर्शगुणोऽनिल: | परान्वयाच्छब्दवांश्च प्राण ओज: सहो बलम् । 2G!

वायोरपि ब्रिकुर्वाणात् कालकर्मस्वभावत: । उदपद्यत तेजो a रूपवत् स्पर्शशब्दवत् । २७॥

तेजसस्तु विकुर्वाणादासीदम्भो रसात्मकम्। रूपवत् स्पर्शवच्चाम्भो घोषवच्च परान्वयात् । २८

fag 4 विकुर्वाणादम्भसो गन्धवानभूत्। परान्वयाद् रसस्पर्शशब्दरूपगुणान्वित: ।२९॥

वैकारिकान्मनो जज्ञे देवा वैकारिका ear दिग्वातार्कप्रचेतोऽश्चिवह्नीन्द्रोपेन्द्रमित्रका:३ 1301

तैजसात् तु विकुर्वाणादिन्द्रियाणि दशाभवन् । ज्ञानहाक्ति: क्रियादाक्तिर्बुद्धि: प्राणश्च तैजसौ ।
श्रात्रं त्वगघ्राणदृग्जिह्वावाग्दार्मेढाङ्धिपायव: । ३१1

From ether, as it underwent transformation, sprang up the element of air, which is
characterized by the quality to touch. Having inherited the characteristics of its cause (ether),
itis further characterized by the quality of sound. Vitality, energy, zeal and strength are only
other names of air. (26) From the element of air, even as it underwent transformation under
the impelling force of Time as well as of the Destiny and innate disposition of the various
individual souls, was evolved fire, whichis characterized by the quality of colour and has also
inherited the characteristics of its chain of causes, viz., sound and touch. (27) From the
element of fire, even as it underwent transformation, sprang up water, which is characterized
by the quality of taste. It is further characterized by the qualities of colour, touch and sound,
which it has inherited from its chain of causes (fire, air and ether). (28) From the element of
water, even asit underwent transformation, came into being the earth, whichis characterized
by the quality of smell as well as by the qualities of taste, colour, touch and sound. which it
has inherited from its chain of causes ( water, fire. air and ether). (29) From theSattvikaEgo

* Suppose someone standing behind a wall loudly exclaims "Elephant! elephant !* Here itis this ejaculation that indicates
the presence of the man wno sees the elephant. as well as of the object he sees.
