Dis. 59 ] BOOK TEN 365

OREO TNR IO TORO I er CEE ETE ESOL ALT TTT EES YON EET ER HB २

अथैकोनषष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LIX
The Lord snatches away (by force) a Parijata tree (from Indra’s paradise)

and kills the demon Naraka (the son of Mother Earth).

न
जा न

यथा eat भगवता भौमो येन च ता: स्रिय: । निरुद्धा एतदाचक्ष्व विक्रमं शार्ङ्गधन्वन: । १ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted : (Be pleased to) recount the aforesaid exploit of Sri
Krsna (the Wielder of the Sariga bow)—how the demon Naraka (son of Mother Earth) was
made short work of by the Lord and wherefore the aforementioned damsels were kept in
bondage (by the former).(1)

श्रीगुक उवाच
गदया निर्विभेदाद्रीन् जञस्रदुर्गाणि सायकै: | चक्रेणाग्निं जलं वायुं मुरपादांस्तथासिना । |
शङ्खनादेन यन्त्राणि हृदयानि मनस्विनाम्। प्राकारं गादया qeat निर्बिभेद गदाधर: । ५ |

Sri Suka replied : Having been apprised of the (nefarious) activities of the demon
Naraka (son of Mother Earth) by Indra, whose umbrella* (one of the insignia of sovereignty)
had been snatched away (by the demon). (nay,) whose mother (Aditi) had been robbed (by
him) of her ear-rings and who had been evicted (by the same demon) from the summit (called
Maniparvata) of Mount Mandara (the mountain of the gods), the Lord rode on (His carrier)
Garuda (the king of birds) alongwith His (favourite) spouse (Satyabhama)t} and flew to
Pragjyotisapura (the capital of Naraka and the premier town of Pragjyotisa, now identified
with Assam), fortified (as it was) on all sides with ramparts of mountains and weapons (such
as artillery), (nay,) rendered difficult of access due to its belts of water, fire and wind, and
encircled with myriads of dreadful and strong snares laid (here and there) by the demon Mura
(an associate and follower of Naraka). (1—3) Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a mace) shattered

* The demon had snatched away (as a matter of fact) the umbrella of Indra’s own brother Varuna (the guardian of the
western quarter and the god of water) and not his own (vice verse 23 of Discourse LIX). But, as the head and overlord ofall
ihe Lokapalas and the ruler of all the three worlds, he deemed this as an encroachment upen his own sovereign rights and
a direct affront to himself and hence considered himself deprived of his own umbrella,

+ The Lord had conferred a boon on Mother Earth saying that He would not take the life of ner son Naraka without her
consent. And Satyabhama being an incamation of Mother Earth. the Lord took her with Him in order to secure her consent
befare killing the demon. Again. it is mentioned in the scriptures that Indra complained to the Lord about the behaviour of the
demon and sought redress of his grievances while He was staying in the palace of Satyabhama. Hence He took her just for
her diversion.
