Dis. 2] ` BOOK THREE ‘ 141

ec cag ean ah et Tn Bo a a Sei ae i ib i
तिष्ठन्निषण्णं परमेष्ठिधिष्ण्ये न्यबोधयद्देव निधारयेति 122 |
ae बकी यं स्तनकालकूटं जिघांसयापाययदप्यसाध्वी ।
लेभे गतिं धात्र्युचितां ततोऽन्यं क वा ca al AT । २३॥
a संयुगेऽचक्षत तार्कष्यपुत्रमंसेसुनाभायुधमापतन्तम् । २४।

Beholding that form, which was the highest delight of all eyes, at the Rajastya sacrifice
of king Yudhisthira (the son of Dharma, the god of virtue), the inhabitants of all the three
worlds thought that the entire workmanship of Brahmain creating this mortal world had been
exhausted in fashioning that form. (13) Feeling honoured by His love-laden smiles and jokes
and sportive glances (which reciprocated their love), the women of Vraja followed Him (in
His excursions to the woods) with their eyes and mind and stood (like statues), leaving their
household work half-finished. (14) With a mind full of compassion for His gentle forms
(Vasudeva and others), that were being persecuted by His wild forms (such as Kamsa), the
Lord, who is the Ruler both of Prakrti and the manifest creation, though unborn, appeared
(in this world of matter) along with His glorious part manifestation (Balarama) even as fire
(which, though present everywhere ina latent form, is manifested through wood). (15) That
He who is unborn should assume the appearance of being born in the house of Vasudeva
and dwell in Vraja as if for fear of the enemy (Karnsa), and that He who is possessed of infinite
prowess should Himself flee the city (of Mathura), scared as it were by Kalayavana, puzzles
me (as something irreconcilable with His divinity). (16) My mind is filled with agony as | recall
what He said to His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki), bowing at their feet, "Dear father and
mother, being in great dread of Karnsa, we (Balarama and myself) failed to render any
service to you (repay our debt to you); therefore, be pleased to forgive us !" (17) Having
inhaled (the fragrance of) the dust of His lotus-feet, what man can ever forget it, remembering
that He is the same Lord who removed the earth's burden by the mere play of His arched
eyebrows, which represents the god of death ? (18) You must have seen (with your own
eyes) the consummation (oneness with the Lord) attained by Sigupala (the king of Cedi), who
hated Sri Krsna—a consummation which even Yogis (ascetics) long to attain through the
efficient practice of Yoga ! Who could bear separation from such a benign lord ? (19)
Similarly, such other heroes of this mortal world as were killed in action (during the
Mahabharata war) by the missiles discharged by Arjuna (son of Prtha), while drinking with
(the cup of) their eyes (the nectar of) Sri Krsna’s lotus-like countenance, which ravished all
eyes, attained to His (supreme) Abode. (20) Himself the suzerain lord of all the three worlds,
He is equalled by none, much less surpassed by anybody, and has all His desires satiated
by virtue of His own supremely blissful character. Nay, His very footstool is adored by the
eternal guardians of the various spheres with the crest of their diadems while offering their
presents (tributes) to Him. (21) Standing before Ugrasena, who sat on his royal throne, He
submitted, "My lord, listen (to my prayer) !" That He should thus behave like a servant
confounds us, His slaves, to the utmost degree, dear Vidura. (22) Oh, even that impious
woman, Putana (the sister of the demon Baka)—who suckled Him (as a Babe) at her breast,
which was daubed with a most deadly poison, with intent to kill Him—got from Him (in return)
the destiny appropriate to a foster-mother ! Is there anyone so merciful, whom we should
resort to for protection, other than Him ? (23) | consider even those demons as devotees of
the Lord, who had fixed their mind on the Lord of the three worlds through anger (born of
animosity), and who beheld on the battle-field Garuda (son of the sage KaSyapa) swooping
