Dis. 10] BOOK ELEVEN 559

व शाशा शाक AA ग cece Peed

preceptor of tranquil mind who has realized Me as identical with Myself. (5) He should be free
from pride, jealousy, sloth and attachment; he should be firmly devoted to his preceptor and
cool, anda seeker after Self-Knowledge he should not be fault-finding and one indulging in
useless talk. (6) He should not feel attached to his wife, children, home, lands, relations and
wealth etc., and should find his purpose equally in all. (7) As a burning fire, that shows things,
is different from the piece of wood thatis burnt and illumined, sois the self-manifest soul, the
witness of all, distinct from the subtle and gross bodies. (8) Just as fire burning a piece of
wood assumes its qualities of destructibility, coming into being, smallness or magnitude, and
variety, so does the soul assume the attributes of the body when it enters it. (9) The subtle
as wellas the gross body is constituted of the Gunas controlled by the Lord; andtransmigration
of the soul is the result of identifying it with the body. This misapprehension can be dispelled
only by the real knowledge of the Self. (10) Therefore, through inquiry one should gradually
realize the transcendent and absolute Self, permeating the body etc., and the latter as unreal
and different from the Self. (11) The preceptor is the piece of wood underneath, the disciple
is the upper one and the instruction is the middle one or churning rod; and (Self-)knowledge
is the delightful fire produced by friction. (12) The perfectly purified wisdom obtained from an
efficient preceptor dispels Maya, the product of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and these
Gunas too; and ultimately the intellect itself becomes quiescent as fire with its fuel
consumed.(13) If you admit the variety of souls, the agents of actions, subject to happiness
and misery; if you maintain that the regions, time, the Vedas and the soul are eternal; and
if you hold that all objects while constantly changing are eternal and that the whole sense of
perception is engendered by the objects perceived and then changes with the objects; then,
O Uddhava, you will have to admit that all souls associated with a body are subject to time
and repeatedly to the states of birth and death etc. Then it is evident from your.standpoint
that the doer of actions is surely subject to pleasure andpain and for one so dependent there
can be little happiness. (14—17) Even learned persons, because they have bodies, enjoy
no happiness, and even fools are not necessarily unhappy. Therefore egotism on the part
of both is simply vain. (18) Even if they know how to win happiness and overcome misery,
they surely have not been able to discover means of averting death. (19) What happiness
can wealth or any sense-enjoyment bring to man when the nearness of death gives him no
satisfaction, just as a victim being escorted to the place of execution cannot enjoy any
pleasure ? (20) Like the worldly pleasures, the bliss of heaven is also vitiated by envy,
jealousy, evanescence and decay. There are many impediments in attaining to that bliss and
it is fruitless (at times) like cultivation. (21) You should also hear how one attains the region
through the successful performance of religious duties unbalked by interrruptions. (22) One
who performs sacrifices in this world and propitiates the gods through them goes to heaven
and enjoys there heavenly pleasures, gained through his actions, and feels happy like the
deities. (23) He assumes a beautiful form and flying in a celestial car earned through his
meritorious deeds and surrounded by heavenly damsels and sung by heavenly singers he
goes about blissfully. (24) But while merrily sporting with the celestial damsels in heavenly
pleasances and flying in a celestial car, adorned with small bells and whose speed is
controlled by the will of the rider, he does not notice his impending fall. (25) He enjoys heaven
so long as his meritorious deeds bear fruit; but when his merit is exhausted, driven by time,
though reluctant, he has to take birth in the lower regions. (26) If a person associates with
the wicked and delights in impiety, or losing control over his senses indulges in low worldly
pleasures and becomes mean, avaricious, lustful and oppressive to living creatures, and
(misled by the wicked) kills animals ignoring religious sanction, and worships ghosts and
goblins, he inevitably goes to hell and assumes bodies of low ignorant creatures. (27-28)
