700 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 8

५
ROR SOR ROR ARE GOON रा OE TE OH RAN TE OTE NERA ज६ ग्र TROT ६88 ERENT ककक

the Brahmana sage. (31)
ada युञ्जतश्चित्तं तप:स्वाध्यायसंयमै: । अनुग्रहायाविरासीन्नरनारायणो हरि: ।३२॥
a शुक्ककृष्णो नवकञ्जलोचनो wat रौरववल्कलाम्बरौ ।
पवित्रपाणी उपवीतकं त्रिवृत् कमण्डलुं दण्डमृजु च वैणवम् ।३३॥
पद्माक्षमालामुत जन्तुमार्जनं ag च Wan wa रूपिणौ ।
तपत्तडिद्दर्णपिशाङ्गरोचिषा प्रांशु दधानौ विबुधर्षभार्चितो ।३४॥
a 8 भगवतो रूपे नरनारायणावृषी । दृष्टोत्थायादरेणोच्चैर्ननामाङ्गेन . दण्डवत् । ३५॥
स तत्सन्दर्शनानन्दनिर्वृतात्मेद्दियाशय: । हष्टरोमाश्रुपूर्णाक्षो न सेहे तावुदीक्षितुम् । ३६1
उत्थाय प्राञ्जलि: प्रह्वे औत्सुञ्यादार्लिषन्निव । नमो नम sitet awe गद्दाक्षर: 1391
तयोरासनमादाय पाद्योरवनिज्य च । अर्हणेनानुलेपेन धूपमाल्यैरपूजयत् ।३८॥
सुखमासनमासीनौ प्रसादाभिमुखौ मुनी। पुनरानम्य पादाभ्याँ गरिष्ठाविदमब्रवीत् ।३९॥

To shower His grace on the sage, who was thus concentrating his mind (on the Lord)
through asceticism, study of the Vedas and self-control, Lord Sri Hari appeared before him
in the form of {the divine sages) Nara and Narayana. (32) Lords Nara and Narayana, the
adored (even) of the chief of the gods (Brahma and others), were (severally) fair and dark-
brown of complexion with eyes resembling fresh-blown lotuses, possessed of four arms
each and clad in the skin of a black buck and bark (respectively). They wore rings of {the
sacred) KuSa grass andthe sacred threefold thread (each consisting of three strands) as well
as a string of lotus seeds and carried a Kamandalu, straight bamboo staffand a broom (made
of yarns) for sweeping the ground and clearing it of insects (without killing them) as well as
a handful of Kuga. They were tall {of stature) and by the golden lustre (of Their body)
resembling the bright flashes of lightning looked like two direct embodiments of asceticism
itself. (83-34) Markandeya rose onseeing the sages Nara and Narayana, the two well-known
manifestations of the almighty Lord, and greeted Them with great reverence by his body
fallen flat like a log (on the ground). (35) With his body, senses and mind exhilarated through
joy occasioned by Their sight at close quarters, hair standing on end and eyes filled with
tears, the sage could not look at them. (36) With joined palms he stood bent low, as though
embracing Them out of longing, and said to the two almighty Lords in faltering tones, “Hail,
hail (to You both) !" (37) Fetching Them a seat and washing Their feet, he worshipped Them
by offering Them water to wash Their hands with, sandal-paste, incense and garlands. (38)
When the two most exalted sages were comfortably seated and looked favourably disposed,
the sage bowed at Their feet once more and spoke as follows. (39)

मार्कण्डेय उवाच
किं वर्णये aa विभो यदुदीरितोऽसु: संस्पन्दते तमनु वाङ्मनइन्द्रियाणि ।
स्पन्दन्ति वै तनुभृतामजदार्वयोश्च स्वस्याप्यथापि भजतामसि भावबन्धु: ।॥४०॥
Tif इमे wad भगवंस्रिलोक्या: क्षेमाय तापविरमाय च मृत्युजित्यै ।
नाना बिभर्ष्यवितुमन्यतनूर्यथेदं ge पुनर्ग्रससि सर्वमिवोर्णनाभि: ive!
तस्यावितु: स्थिरचरेशितुरङ्घ्रिमूलं ae न कर्मगुणकालरुज: स्पृशन्ति ।
यद् वै स्तुवन्ति निनमन्ति यजन्त्यभीश्ष्णं ध्यायन्ति वेदहृदया मुनयस्तदाप्त्यै 1४२॥
ब्रह्मा बिभेत्यलमतो द्विपरार्धधिष्ण्य: कालस्य ते किमुत तत्कृतभौतिकानाम् ।४३॥
