Dis. 23 ] ` BOOK FOUR’ '”' 395°"

. ग्रेईं॰’घेप्नंग्रैद्मेघ्रोर्व्यघंर्यं॰’घेघेप्नेत्मिश्लोग्र्’प्प्नेद्येप्रीप्नंफ्रि…ग्रेप्रंप्नेग्रेघेग्नेद्मेक्लीर्व्यग्नेघ्रेभेगेह्मैफ्रिघंप्नेथेझेध्रेघेध्रे…घेछीक्लीघेज्ञेर्णेध्रेषींघ्रेन्धिंर्भंपैश्चै’र्भंघेद्बीद्बीयीं
च्र्तर्त्त न व वज He वी वी ती ॐ

navel and (then) at other places, such as the heart, the chest, the throat and the space
between the eyebrows. (14) Directing the breath higher up by stages to the crown of the head
and free from (all cravings), he merged the air of his body in the cosmic air, the solid part
of the body in the earth, the fire in the cosmic fire, the appertures (in which the various senses
are located) in ether and the liquid part of his body in water—each in its own source. He
(then) merged earth in water, water in fire, fire in the air, and the air in ether. (15-16) He
(further) merged the mind in the senses (by which it is drawn in the life of varied experience)
and the senses in the subtle elements from which they severally proceed; and carrying these
(the above-mentioned ether as well as the senses and the mind as merged in the subtle
elements) higher still (by the ego and withdrawing them into the same), merged them along
with the ego in the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence). (17) He merged the
Mahat-tattva (the ground of all its evolutes) in the Jiva (the embodied soul), conditioned by
Maya; and established in his true Self (Brahma), by force of wisdom and dispassion the
mighty Prthu, who was till now a Jiva conditioned by Maya, cast off the condition (of
Jivahood) attaching to the Self. (18)
Sam महाराज्ञी तत्पत्यनुगता वनम्। सुकुमार्यतदर्हा च यत्पद्भ्यां wa ya: ।१९॥
त्त्र — .
नाविन्दतार्तिं परिकर्शितापि सा प्रेयस्करस्पर्शनमाननिर्वृति: 1201
देहें विपन्नाखिलचेतनादिकं पत्यु: पृथिव्या दयितस्य चात्मन: ।
आलक्ष्व किञ्चिच्च विलप्य सा सती चितामथारोपयदद्रिसानुनि । २१।
नत्वा दिविस्थांस्तिदशांस्ति: wie विवेरा बह्निं ध्यायती भर्तृपादौ ie
विलोक्यानुगतां साध्वीं gy drat पतिम्। तूष्टुवुर्वरदा देवैर्देवपत्न्य: AEM: 1231
gaa: कुसुमासारं तस्मिन्मन्दरसानुनि । नदत्स्वमरतूर्येषु गृणन्ति स्म परस्परम् । २४।

The great queen Arci, his consort, had followed him to the forest, though (very) delicate
and unfit even to tread on the rough soil with her feet. (19) Though exceedingly emaciated
through devoted participation in the austerities (reposing on the bare ground and so on) and
sacred duties of her husband, her (personal) services to the latter and by nourishing her body
with the food (bulbs, roots and fruits etc.) taken by Rsis (hermits), she did not feel miserable
(all the same), gratified as she was by the touch of the hand of her beloved spouse and the
attention received from him. (20) Finding the body of the sovereign of the entire globe and
her own beloved lord bereft of consciousness and all other signs (of life), that virtuous lady
wept for a while and then placed it on a pyre on the ridge of the hill. (21) Having performed
the rites (Suited to the occasion), she bathed in the waters of a stream; and after offering
water (through her hollowed palms) to (the spirit of) her husband, who had performed noble
deeds, and bowing to the divinities who stood in the heavens (witnessing the scene from their
aerial cars), she thrice went round the (funeral) fire clockwise (as a mark of respect to her
departed husband) and entered into it, contemplating on the feet of her lord. (22) Seeing the
pious lady follow her husband, Prthu, the foremostamong heroes, goddesses and gods,
capable of conferring boons (on their votaries) applauded her in their thousands. (23)
Raining down flowers on that peak of Mount Mandara, they spoke to one another (as follows)
in the midst of a flourish of celestial trumpets. (24)

देव्य ऊचु:
aa sa agen या चैवं भूभुजां पतिम्। सर्वात्मना पतिं भेजे यज्ञेशं श्रीर्वधूरिव । २५॥
