Dis. 9] BOOK SEVEN 689:

POKRAAMKHAAAKOAHHAWEKEKAK SARA HEAR AT HERAT HT TeAA HMA KHMER HEHEHE ON R

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
A Eulogy of the Lord (by Prahrada)

ARG उवाच
एवं सुरादय: ad ब्रह्मरुद्रपुर:सरा: । नोपैतुमशकन्मन्युसंरम्भं सुदुरासदम्। १ ।
साक्षाच्छी: प्रेषिता देवैर्दृष्टा तन्महदद्भुतम्। अदृष्टश्रुतपूर्वत्वात् सा नोपेयाय ङाङ्किता । २ ।
vee प्रेषयामास ब्रह्मावस्थितमन्तिके i तात प्रशमयोपेहि स्वपित्रे कुपितं प्रभुम् । ३ |
aaft ae राजन्महाभागवतोऽर्भक: । उपेत्य भुवि कायेन ननाम विधृताञ्जलि: | ४ |

उत्थाप्य तच्छीष्ण्यदधात् कराम्बुजं कालाहिवित्रस्तधियां कृताभयम् & |

स तत्करस्पर्शधुताखिलाशुभ: सपद्यभिव्यक्तपरात्मदर्शन: |

तत्पादपद्मं हृदि निर्वृतो दधौ हृष्यत्तनु: क्लिन्नहदश्रुलोचन: | ६ ।
अस्तोषीद्धरिमेकाग्रमनसा सुसमाहित: । प्रेमगद्गदया वाचा तन्न्यस्तहृदयेक्षण: । |

Narada resumed: (Extolling the Lord) thus all the gods and other (heavenly) beings, led
by Brahma (the creator) and Rudra (Lord Siva), dared not go near Him, possessed as He was
by anger and (hence) most difficult to approach. (1) Sri (the Lord’s own Consort and the
goddess of beauty and prosperity) was personally sent by the gods (to appease Him).
Perceiving that great wonder and full of misgiving (however), She dared not go near, the form
having neither been seen nor heard of (by Her) before. (2) Brahma (then) sent Prahrada,
standing close by, with the words; “Approach, dear one, and pacify the Lord, who has waxed
angry at your father." (3) Uttering the words "So be it", and slowly drawing near, O king
(Yudhisthira), the great child devotee (Prahrada) bowed down with his body (lying prostrate)
on the ground and his palms joined together. (4) Overwhelmed with compassion on seeing
the infant fallen atthe soles of His feet, andliftingit, the Lord placed onits head His lotus hand,
which has (ever) brought security to those whose mind is terribly afraid of the serpent in the
shape of Time. (5) All (traces of) evil (in the shape of dormant desires or impressions left on
the mind by good or evil actions of past lives) having been wiped out by the (most auspicious
and sacred) touch of His hand and direct knowledge of the Supreme Spirit instantly revealed
to him, Prahrada felt (supremely) gratified and with the hair of his body standing on end, his
heart moistened (with love) and tears (of joy) in his eyes, he installed (an image of) His lotus-
feet in his heart. (6) Perfectly composed, he extolled Sri Hari with a concentrated mind and
in a voice choked with emotion, his heart and eyes fixed on Him. (7)

Were उवाच
ब्रह्मादय: सुरगणा मुनयोऽथ सिद्धा: सत्त्वैकतानमतयो वचसां प्रवाहै: |
नाराधितुषुरूगुणरधुनापिपिंप्नु fa तोष्टुमर्हति a मे हरिरुग्रजाते: । ८ ।

धनाभिजनरूपतप:श्रुतौजस्तेज:प्रभावबलपोरुषबुद्धियोगा: ।
नप्ताधनायहिंभवन्तिफ्स्त्यपुसोभक्तातुताषभगवान्यजबूथप।य।९।
fame,” द्विषड्गुणयुतादरविन्दनाभपादारविन्दविमुखाच्छ्पचं वरिष्ठम्।
मन्ये तदर्पितमनोवचनेहितार्थप्राणं gaa स कुलं न तु भूरिमान: gol
