396 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23
Beer ar ee ङी hr Pra eee ee eK AEH AHHH OAH AEA EHH EO COCKE EH PEROT ES ETE EOE Eee HRC eh OE Ht ह
an नूनं व्रजत्यूर्ध्वमनु aa uff सती । पश्यतास्मानतीत्यार्चिर्दुर्विभाव्येन कर्मणा 125 |
at am fe aera भगवत्पदम्। भुवि लोलायुषो a वै नैष्कर्म्य साधयन्त्युत 1201
a aa amg Se महता भुवि । लब्ध्वापवर्ग्य मानुष्यं विषयेषु विषज्जते ।२८॥

The goddesses said : Oh, blessed is this wife, who thus waited upon her husband
(Prthu), the king of kings, with all her being even as Sri (the goddess of beauty and
prosperity), the Consort of Bhagavan Visnu, waits upon Him, the Lord of sacrifices. (25)
Following her husband, the son of Vena, that virtuous lady will surely ascend to Vaikuntha.
See how by virtue of her remarkable deed, which cannot easily be conceived of, she is
passing beyond us (the heavenly region) ! (26) What other position could be beyond the
reach of those mortals who, though their span of life on this earth is so uncertain, attain
spiritual wisdom, which indeed leads to God-Realization ? (27) Alas ! he has been (badly)
deceived and is proving his own enemy, who, having attained with great difficulty the
human state, capable of yielding (the fruit of) liberation, becomes a slave to the pleasures

of sense. (28) ति
मेत्रेय उवाच

स्तुवतीष्रमरस्रीषु पतिलोकं गता वधू:। यं वा आत्मविदां धुर्यो aa: प्रापाच्युतादशाय: । २९॥

इत्थभूतानुभावोऽसौ YY: स भगवत्तम:। कीर्तितं तस्य चरितमुद्दामचरितस्य ते ।३०॥

य इदं सुमहत्पुण्यं श्रद्धयावहित: पठेत्।श्रावयेच्छृणुयाद्वापि a get: पदवरीमियात् । ३१॥

ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मवर्चस्वी राजन्यो जगतीपति: । वैर्य:पठन्विट्पति: regs: सत्तमतामियात् ।३२॥

firma इदमाकर्ण्य नरो नार्यथवाऽऽदृता। अप्रज: सुप्रजतमो निर्धनो धनवत्तम: 1331

अस्पष्टकीर्ति:; सुयशा wat भवति पण्डित: । sé werd पुंसाममङ्गल्यनिवारणम् ।३४॥

धन्यं weg स्वर्ग्य कलिमलापहम्।धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणांसम्यकसिद्धिमभीप्सुभि: |

श्रद्धयैतदनुश्राव्यं चतुर्णां कारणं परम् । ३५1

विजयाभिमुखो राजा श्रुत्वैतदभियाति यान्। बलिं aa हरन्त्यग्रे राजान: yas यथा । ३६॥

मुक्तान्यसङ्गो भगवत्यमलां भक्तिमुद्वहन्।वैन्यस्य चरितं पुण्यं शृणुयाच्छावयेत्पठेत् । ३७1

वैचित्रव्रीर्याभिहितं महन्माहात्प्यसूचकम् | अस्मिन् कृतमतिर्मर्त्य: पार्थवीं गतिमाप्नुयात् ।३८।

अनुदिनमिदमादरेण शृण्वन् पृथुचरितं प्रथयन् fae: ।
भगवति भवसिन्धुपोतपादे स च निपुणां लभते ta मनुष्व: 1३९1
Maitreya went on: While the wives of the gods were (thus) praising her, Arci (the consort

of Prthu) reached the abode of her lord—the realm to which Vena's son, the foremost
among the knowers of the Self, who had his mind (ever) fixed on the immortal Lord Visnu,
had attained. (29) Such was the glory of the most powerful king Prthu. | have (thus) told you
the story of that king of remarkable deeds. (30) Whoever reads with reverence and
concentration of mind this story, yielding extraordinary merit, listens to it or narrates it bids
fair to attain to the (exalted) state of Prthu (viz., the divine abode of Lord Visnu). (31) A
Brahmana (one belonging to the priestly class), reading it, should attain pre-eminence in
sacred knowledge, a Ksatriya (a member of the warrior class) should become the ruler of
the (whole) world; a Vaisya should become a chief of his clan and a Sudra (one belonging

to the artisan and labouring classes) should (by listening to it) acquire pre-eminence (among
his own class).(32) A man ora woman thrice listening to it with reverence is blessed with best

