एकादश: स्कन्ध:
अथ प्रथमोऽध्याय:

Srimad Bhagavata-Mahapurana
Book Eleven
Discourse |

The curse of the Rsis invoking the destruction of Yadu's race
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
कृत्वा दैत्यवधं कृष्ण: सरामो यदुभिर्वृत: । भुवोऽवतारयद् भारं जविष्ठं जनयन् कलिम् । १ ।
a कोपिता: सुबहु पाण्डुसुता: सपत्नैर्दुर्यूतहेलनकचग्रहणादिभिस्तान् ।
कृत्वा निमित्तमितरेतस्त: समेतान् हत्वा नृपान् निरहरत् क्षितिभारमीशा: । २ ।
भूभारराजपृतना वयदुभिर्निरस्य गुप्तै: स्वबाहुभिरचिन्तयदप्रमेय: ।
मन्येऽवनेर्ननु गतोऽप्यगतं fe wt ae यादवं कुलमहो अविषह्यमास्ते । ३ ।
नैवान्यत: परिभवोऽस्य भवेत् कथञ्चिन्मत्संश्रयस्य विभवोन्नहनस्य नित्यम् ।
अन्त:कलिं यदुकुलस्य विधाय वेणुस्तम्बस्य वह्निमिव हान्तिमुपैमि धाम । ४ ।
एवं व्यवसितो राजन् सत्यसङ्कल्पं ईश्चर: । शापव्याजेन विप्राणां संजह्रे age विभु: । ५ ।
स्वमूर्या लोकलावण्यनिर्मुक्त्या लोचनं नॄणाम् । गीर्भिस्ता: erat चित्तं पदैस्तानीक्षतां क्रिया: । ६ ।
आच्छिद्य कीर्तिं सुश्लोकां वितत्य ह्यञ्जसा नु कौ । तमोऽनया तरिष्यन्तीत्यगात् स्वं पदमीश्वर: । ७ ।
Sri Suka (son of Vedavyasa) began again : Attended by Balarama and the Yadavas,
Sri Krsna destroyed the demons and, creating violent discord (between the Pandavas and
the Kauravas) relieved the earth of her burden. (1) Making His instrument the Pandavas,
whose ire had been repeatedly provoked by their enemies (the Kauravas), through deceitful
gambling, humiliating insult, dragging (Draupadi) by the hair and in other ways, the Lord
caused destruction of the kings gathered on both sides and (thus) relieved the earth of her
burden. (2) Having thus annihilated the kings and their armies, who were a burden to the
earth, through the Yadavas, protected by His own arms, the Lord of inscrutable ways
thought:—"Though the burden of the earth has been removed, yet | do not take it as
(completely) removed so long as the unconquerable race of Yadu exists. (3) Having always
been protected by Me, and grown uncontrollable through prosperity, this race of Yadu can

by no means be vanquished by others (even by gods). (Therefore) just as a bamboo grove
is consumed by fire (produced by the friction of the bamboos themselves), | shall destroy the
