74 SRIMADBHAGAVATA i atti । [.Dis. 18

BoP Bre he Fe Re Re Pe Be Be CRT RTE Ke Ee RR Rt Re Ge RT RT He Ae BB Me eRe Re Be Be He RT Be Bt RT ENT Sr Bs Bs Bs He He RY eRe Be He WOM Be Re He BY Bee Be Re a Ra Hr Bs Be Ry Re Er He

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVIII

The youthful sage Srhgi utters an imprecation against king Pariksit
सूत उवाच

& द्रौण्यस्त्रविप्नुष्ठो न मातुरुदरे मृत: । अनुग्रहाद् भगवत: कृष्णस्याद्धुतकर्मण: । १ |
ब्रह्मकोपोत्थिताद् यस्तु तक्षकात्प्राणविप्लवात्। न सम्मुमोहोरुभयाद् भगवत्यर्षिताशाय: । २ ।
उत्सृज्य ada: ag विज्ञाताजितसंस्थिति: | वैयासकेर्जहौ शिष्यो गङ्गायां स्वं wea! ३ |
नोत्तमश्लोकवार्तानां जुषतां तत्कथामृतम् । स्यात्सम्भ्रमोऽन्तकालेऽपि स्मरतां तत्पदाम्बुजम् । ४ ।
तावत्कलिर्न प्रभवेत् प्रविष्टोऽपीह सर्वत: । aed महानुर्वयामाभिमन्यव एकराद्। ५ |
यस्मिन्नहनि ada भगवानुत्ससर्जं गाम्।तदैवेहानुवृत्तोऽसावधर्मप्रभव: कलि: । ६ ।
ames कलिं ame सारङ्ग इव aR! Foray सिद्ध्यन्ति नेतराणि कृतानि यत् । ७ ।
fe नु weg zo कलिना धीरभीरुणा। अप्रमत्त: प्रमत्तेषु यो वृको नृषु वर्तते । ८ ।

उपवर्णितमेतद् व: qua पारीक्षितं मया । वासुदेवकथोपेतमाख्यानं यदपृच्छत | ९ ।
या या: कथा Wiad: कथनीयोरुकर्मण: । गुणकर्माश्रया: पुम्भि: संसेव्यास्ता लुभूषुभि: । १० ।

Sita continued : Though scorched in the mother's womb by the missile discharged
by Aswatthama (the son of Drona), king Pariksit did not die (was saved from extinction)
by the grace of Lord Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds.(1) Having given his mind and heart
to the Lord, he did not feel embarrassed even when faced with the terrible fear of meeting
his death at the hands of the serpent Taksaka, spurred on by the anger (curse) of a
Brahmana boy. (2) Shaking off attachment to everything, he accepted the discipleship
of the sage Suka (the celebrated son of Vyasa) and, having realized the truth about Lord
Sri Hari, cast off his body on the bank of the Ganga. (3) No confusion arises, even at
the hour of death, in the mind of those who talk of none else than Lord Sri Krsna of
excellent renown, enjoy His nectar-like stories and contemplate on His lotus-feet. (4) Kali
was powerless on this earth,even though he had penetrated every part of it, so long as
the great king Pariksit (son of Abhimanyu) continued to rule over the same as its
undisputed sovereign. (5) As a matter of fact, Kali, the progenitor of unrighteousness,
had set his foot on the earth the very day, nay, the very moment the Lord quitted it. (6)
The emperor, however, who like the bee, drew the best out of everything, bore no grudge
to Kali; for ( he knew that) in this age meritorious acts bear fruit immediately (as soon
as they are projected) but not so the other (sinful) acts, which yield fruit only when they
are actually committed. (7) In fact, of what account is Kali, who is heroic in the midst
of children (the ignorant) but is cowardly, before the wise (strong-minded), and who like
the wolf is ever alert to take the unwary men by surprise. (8) | have thus related to you
(O sages !) the sacred life-account of king Pariksit, connected as it is with the story of
Lord Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva); this was what you enquired of me. (9) Lord Sri Krsna
performed many a deed which is a fit subject for discourse. Men seeking blessedness
should, therefore, listen with rapt attention to all His stories that depict His virtues and
narrate His exploits.(10)

RIT DY:
ae sta समा: ara जञाश्वतीर्विशदं यश: । aed शंससि कृष्णस्य wera हि न: । ११
