Dis. 9)], BOOK SEVEN 697 `

भेथेध्रेघ्नेश्चे’गैभैर्प/भ्रेपैधैप्रेंमॆधे*घेष्पै’धैस्यै’घ्नेघ्नेघ्नेझेध्रेघेघेघेप्तेष्टौघ्नेघ्नेग्रेप्तेघेधेष्टेघेद्दैष्टैष्टैक्विर्व्यपैर्व्यर्येर्किगॆग्भि…भंभं…नोर्मीषींभ्रंर्व्य

(and ending with the Indriyas, that is to say, Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic
intelligence, Anank&ra or the ego, the five subtle and the five gross elements and the ten
Indriyas), nor the mind etc. (viz., the mind, intellect and reason), nor (the various) living
beings including the gods and human beings, all of whom have a beginning and an end (too),
are able to know Youin truth, O much-praised One! Thinking thus, men of good sense desist*
from the study of the Vedas and other scriptures (and devote themselves exclusively to
meditation). (49) Therefore, cana man develop devotion to You, the goal of ascetics of the
highest order; except through whole-hearted service to You, O most worshipful One—
service consisting of (the following) six limbs, viz., salutation, glorification, worship in the form
of offering one's actions to You, waiting on You, concentrating one's mind on Your feet and
listening to Your stories? (50)
नारद उवाच
एतावद्वर्णितगुणो भक्त्या भक्तेन निर्गुण: । प्रह्रादुं प्रणतं प्रीतो यतमन्युरभाषत । ५१॥

Narada resumed : The Lord, who is beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and

whose so many (transcendental) virtues were celebrated with reverence by His devotee

(Prahrada), and who had not only controlled His anger but was (highly) pleased (with the
latter), spoke (as follows) to Prahrada, who was bent low (with respect). (51)

a

were भद्र भद्रं ते प्रीतोऽहं तेऽसुरोत्तम । at वृणीघ्वाभिमतं कामपूरोऽस्म्यहं FUT । ५२॥
मम्पप्रीणतआयुष्पन्द्रठ्निंदुर्लभंहिमे।दृष्टुग्पांनपुनर्जंन्तुर।त्मानंतप्रुपहंति।५३।
प्रीणन्ति ह्यथ at धीरा: सर्वभावेन area: | श्रेयस्कामा महाभागा: सर्वासामाशिषां पतिम् Gy |
एवं प्रलोभ्यमानोऽपि वरैर्लोकप्रलोभनै: | एकान्तित्वाद् भगवति नैच्छत् तानसुरोत्तम: । ५५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां सप्तमस्कन्धे प्रह्रादचरिति भगवत्स्तवो नाम नवमोऽध्याय: IR |
The Lord said : O noble Prahrada, may good betide you! !am pleased with you, O chief
of the demons ! Ask any boon liked by you; | am wont to gratify the desires of men. (52) To
him who is unable.to propitiate Me, O long-lived one, | am difficult of perception. (And) having
beheld Me (once), a living being has no longer any reason to bewail itself (to grieve). (53)
lt is for this reason alone that enlightened and pious souls, who are highly fortunate and
desirous of blessedness (endeavour to) propitiate Me, the Lord (bestower) ofall boons, with
all their being. (54) Even on being thus tempted with boons that are so alluring to the world,
Prahrada (the best of the Asuras) did not hanker after them, exclusively devoted as he was
to the Lord. (55)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "A Eulogy of the Lord’, forming part
of the story of Prahrada, in Book Seven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

SR ENE E १५
PICS ESS mes

* This is bome out by the Lord Himself when He says in the Bhagavadgita:—
Wal ते मोहकलिलं बुद्धिर्व्यतितरिष्यति। तदा गन्तासि निर्वेदं श्रोतव्यस्य श्रुतस्य च॥ (I1. 52)

“When your mind will have fully crossed the mire of delusion, you will then grow indifferent to what has been heard and
what is yet to be-heard about this world and the next.”
