558 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ( Dis. 2.
Licht यड क दौक क कक कौ LA OPEL SAREE SERS LOS TERS ES SRALE A OSS. O SEES SEES SERRE ASA RAGE EE ee
allone's sins, even when itis intended to denote someone else, or when itis uttered jestingly
(in love but not jeeringly) or as an interjection in the midst of a song or out of (seeming)
disrespect (but not real; for disrespect actually shown to the Lord or a jeer flung at Him
constitutes in itself an unpardonable sin). (14) A man who articulates the word ‘Hari’ (or, for
that matter, any other name of the Lord even ) involuntarily (without any conscious effort on
his part) when fallen down, stumbled, bitten (by a snake or any other poisonous creature)
heated (by fever etc.), injured (by a blow) or when he has broken a limb, no longer deserves
(to suffer) torment (in hell). (15) Arduous and easy processes of expiation have been
thoughtfully prescribed by the great sages (law-givers) in the case of (comparatively) great
and small sins. (16) Those sins are (certainly) got rid of by the said processes of expiation
such as austere penance, charity and Japa (muttering of prayers), but not the kernel
(vestiges in the form of impressions) of those sins, which is (also) traceable to the
unrighteous acts. Those impressions too are obliterated through the service of (devotion to)
the Lord's feet. (17) Any name of the Lord of excellent renown, whichis distinctly pronounced
(by a man)—(whether) knowingly (with the consciousness that it wipes out all one's sins) or
unknowingly (without such knowledge)—destroys a man's sins (as surely) as a fire
consumes the fuel (under all circumstances, no matter whether it has been kindled by a man
who knows its burning properties or by an innocent child who is unaware of its burning
capacity). (18) Just as a medicine possessing the highest potency is sure to produce its
salutary effect even on one who is unaware of its efficacy, though taken by chance, so does
the Lord's name (which is as holy as any sacred text or formula) reveal its efficacy (in the
shape of wiping out all one's sins) even in the case of him who is unaware of it, when uttered

by him (even) casually. (19)
SY उवाच

a एवं सुविनिर्णीय at भागवतं qd याम्यपाशान्निर्मुच्य fas मृत्योरमूमुचन् । २०॥
इति प्रत्युदिता याम्या दूता यात्वा यमान्तिके । यमराज्ञे यथा सर्वमाचचक्षुररिंदम 1281
Sri Suka resumed: Having thus expounded ina well-reasoned and conclusive way the
cult of Devotion to the Lord (with particular reference to the marvellous efficacy of the Divine
Name), O king (Pariksit), and extricated the said Brahmana (Ajamila) from the noose of
Yama (the god of punishment), the messengers of Lord Visnu secured his release from (the
grip of) Death. (20) Thus foiled in controversy (by the Lord's own messengers), the
messengers of Yama returned to the presence of Yama (their master) and faithfully reported
everything to king Yama, O subduer of foes. (21)
fas: पाशाद्बिनिर्मुक्तो गतभी: प्रकृतिं wa: | ववन्दे शिरसा विष्णो: किङ्करान् दर्शनोत्सव: 1221
तं विवक्षुमभिप्रेत्य महापुरुषकिङ्करा:। सहसा पड्यतस्तस्य तत्रान्तर्दंधिरेऽनघ 1231
अजामिलोऽप्यथाकर्ण्य दूतानां यमकृष्णयो: । धर्मं भागवतं ae त्रैविद्यं च गुणाश्रयम् । २४॥
भक्तिमान् भगवत्याशु माहात्म्यश्रवणाद्धरे: | अनुतापो महानासीत्स्मरतोऽद्युभमात्मन: 1241
ae मे wa कष्टमभूदविजितात्मन: । येन विष्लावितं aa वृषल्यां जायताऽऽत्मना 1261
धिङ्मां विगर्हितं सद्भिर्दुष्कृतं geste feet बालां सतीं योऽहं सुरापामसतीमगाम् । २७॥
वृद्धावनाथौ पितरौ नान्यबन्धू तपस्विनो । अहो मयाधुना त्यक्तावकृतज्ञेन नीचवत् । २८॥
सोऽहं व्यक्तं पतिष्यामि नरके भृहादारुणे । ade: कामिनो यत्र विन्दन्ति यमयातना: । २९॥
Disentangled from the noose (of Yama) and rid of fear, the Brahmana (Ajamila) was his
former self again (became healthy and pious as before) and, delighted with their sight,

bowed his head to the servants of Lord Visnu. (22) Perceiving him eager to speak, the
servants of Bhagavan Visnu (the Supreme Person) suddenly disappeared at that (very)
