662 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4-

BR TWH HH WRT A AAS Ee ee eH eT ae EB eh

स विजित्य दिश: सर्वा लोकांश्च त्रीन् महासुर: | देवासुरमनुष्येन्द्वान् शगन्धर्वगरुडोरगान् । ५ ।
सिद्धचारणविद्याध्रानृषीन् पितॄपतीन् मनून्। यक्षरक्ष:पिशाचेशान् प्रेतभूतपतीनथ । ६ ।
सर्वसत्त्वपतीञ्जित्वा वरामानीय विश्वजित्। cen लोकपालानां स्थानानि ag तेजसा । |
देवोद्यानश्रिया Wore स्म त्रिविष्टपम्।महेन्द्रभवनं साक्षान्निर्मितॆ विश्वकर्मणा ।
त्रैलोक्यलक्ष्यायतनमध्युवासाखिलरद्धिमत् । ८ ।
aa विद्रुमसोपाना महामारकता भुव:। चत्र स्फाटिककुड्यानि वैदूर्यस्तम्भपङ्क्तय: । ९ |
यत्र चित्रवितानानि पद्मरागासनानि oa पय:फेननिभा: ङव्या मुक्तादामपरिच्छदा: 1201
तस्मिन्महेनद्रभवने महाबलो महामना निर्जितलोक एकराट्।
रेमेऽभिवन्द्याङ्ध्रियुग: सुरादिभि: प्रतापितैस्र्जितचण्डशासन: । १२॥
तमङ्ग मत्तं मधुनोरुगन्धिना विवृत्तताम्राक्षमशेषधिष्ण्यपा: |
उपासतोपायनपाणिभिर्विना त्रिभिस्तपोयोगबलौजसां पदम् । १३॥
जगुर्महेन्द्रासनमोजसा स्थितं विश्वावसुस्तुम्बुरुरस्मदादय: |
गन्धर्वसिद्धा ऋषयोऽस्तुवन्मुहुर्विद्याधा अप्सरसश्च पाण्डव । १४॥
a एवं वर्णाश्रमिभि: क्रतुभिर्भूरदक्षिणै: । इज्यमानो हविर्भागानग्रहीत् स्वेन तेजसा । १५॥
अकृष्टपच्या तस्यासीत् सप्तद्वीपवती मही । तथा कामदुघा ng नानाश्चर्यपदं नभ: ।१६॥
रत्नाकराश्च रत्नौघांस्तत्पत्न्यश्चोहुरूर्मिभि: | क्षारसीधुघृतक्षौद्रदधिक्षीरामृतोदका: 1291
fer द्रोणीभिराक्रीडं सर्वर्तुषु गुणान् waa लोकपालानामेक एव पृथग्गुणान् । १८॥
स इत्थं निर्जितककुबेकराड विषयान् प्रियान्। यथोपजोषं भुञ्जानो नातृप्यदजितेन्द्रिय: 1291
The glorious and mighty Brahma of unfailing grace thereupon returned (to his abode),
worshipped by Hiranyakasipu (the foremost of the demons) and being (still) extolled by the
lords of created beings. (3) Having thus secured boons (desired by him) and acquiring a
golden (effulgent) form, the demon (HiranyakaSipu) nursed a grudge against the Lord,
constantly recollecting as he did the death (at His hands) of his (younger) brother
(Hiranyaksa).(4) Having completely subjugated all the (four) quarters as well as the three
spheres (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and having conquered and brought
under control the gods and demons, rulers of men, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), birds
of the species known by the name of Garuda (secretary bird) and serpents, Siddhas (a class
of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards)
and Vidyadharas (heavenly artistes), Rsis (seers), the chiefs of the manes, Manus
(progenitors of mankind, each presiding over a Manvantara), the lords of the Yaksas
(another class of demigods), Raksasas (ogres) and Pisacas (goblins), the leaders of the
Pretas (evil spirits) and Bhutas (ghosts) as well as the rulers of all other species of living
beings, the great Asura (Hiranyakasipu), who had (thus) conquered the (whole) universe,
now usurped the thrones of guardians of the (various) spheres along with their glory. (5—7)
He established himself in heaven, (which is) enriched with the beauty of the celestial garden
(known by the name of Nandana), and took up his residence in the palace of the mighty Indra,
builtby Viswakarma (the architect of the gods) himself, the abode of the wealth of all the three

worlds and rich in all luxuries, where there are stairs of corals, floors of most precious
emeralds, walls of crystals and rows of pillars of cat's-eyes, canopies of various designs and
