Dis. 5] BOOK NINE 21

Sh tik Hh teeth ee eed Site REECE a OTTO ER TENET TEN ATE EES AO LEL AAA HSER AA HES BEES HITS

beings as His own embodiments, let the Brahmana be rid of his trouble. (11)
ति
sf संस्तुवतो wat विष्णुचक्रं सुदर्शनम्। अज्ञाम्यत् सर्वतो विप्रं प्रदहद् राजयाच्ञया । १२।
स मुक्तोऽस्राम्नितापेन gate: स्वस्तिमांस्तत: । प्रशशंस agit युञ्जान: परमाशिष: ।१३॥

Sri Suka continued : While the emperor (Ambarisa) was thus hymning Sudarsana, the
said discus of Lord Visnu, which had (hitherto) been scorching the Brahmana (Durvasa) on
all sides, cooled down at the king's entreaty. (12) Rid of the (burning) heat of the fire of the
missile (Sudargana), Durvasa now felt relieved and applauded the emperor (in the following
words), pronouncing the highest blessings on him. (13)

दुर्वासा उवाच
Be अनन्तदासानां wea दृष्टमद्य मे । कृतागसोऽपि Ae राजन् मङ्गलानि समीहसे ॥१४॥
दुष्कर: को नु साधूनां FRI वा महात्मनाम्। यै: संगृहीतो नो भगवान् सात्वतामृषभो हरि: 124!
यन्नामश्रुतिमात्रेण पुमान् भवति निर्मल: । तस्य तीर्थपद: किं वा दासानामवशिष्यते । १६1
राजन्ननुगृहीतोऽहं त्वयातिकरुणात्मना | मदघं पृष्ठत: कृत्वा प्राणा यन्मेऽभिरक्षिता: 1१७॥

Durvasd observed ; Ah, the glory of servants (votaries) of the infinite Lord has been
witnessed by me today in that you, O emperor, sirive for the good even of him (myself) who
has wronged you. (14) Indeed whatis there hardto accomplish forbenevolent souls andwhat
is there difficult to forswear in the eyes of the high-souled, by whom Lord Sri Hari, the
Guardian of devotees, has been lovingly installed in their heart ? (15) What could there be
wanting on the part of servants (votaries) of that Lord of hallowed feet, through the very
hearing of whose Name a person is rid of all impurities? (16) O king, | have been (greatly)
favoured by you, an extremely kind-hearted soul, in that my life has been saved by you,
overlooking my offence. (17)

राजा तमकृताहार: प्रत्यागमनकाङ्क्षया | चरणावुपसंगृह्य प्रसाद्य समभोजयत् । १८1
सोऽशित्वाऽऽदृतमानीतमातिथ्यं सार्वकामिकम्। तृप्तात्मा नृपतिं प्राह भुज्यतामिति सादरम् 1१९1
प्रीतोऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि तव भागवतस्य वै । दर्शनस्पर्शनालापैरातिथ्येनात्ममेधसा 1201
कर्मावदात्तमेतत् ते maha स्व:स्रियो मुहु: att परमपुण्यां च कीर्तयिष्यति भूरियम् । २१1

The emperor, who had not (yet) taken his meal (ever since) in the hope of the sage's
return, sumptuously fed him after gratifying him (in the first instance) by clasping his feet. (18)
Sated at heart after partaking of the (rich) fare (appropriate to a guest)brought to him with
reverence and gratifying every wish (suiting every taste), Durvasa politely said to the king,
"(Please) take your food, (19) | am really pleased and obliged by the sight, touch and talk
as well as by the hospitality—offered with a mind fixed on the supreme Self—of a
(great)devotee of the Lord in you. (20) Celestial ladies will repeatedly celebrate this
blemishless deed of yours. Nay, this earth (itself) will loudly proclaim Your most sacred

glory." (21)
श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं संकीर्त्य राजानं दुर्वासा: परितोषित: । ययौ विहायसाऽऽमन्त्य ब्रह्मलोकमहैतुकम् 1221
संवत्सरोऽत्यगात् तावद् SAAT नागतो गत: । मुनिस्तद्दर्शनाकाङ्खो राजाऽन्भक्षो बभूव ह ।२३॥
™ च दुर्वाससि सोऽम्बरीषो द्विजोपयोगातिपवित्रमाहरत् |
ऋषेर्विमोक्षे व्यसनं च aa मेने स्ववीर्यं च परानुभावम् ।२४॥
