658 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 +

rir आद्या भोशा sr tet ein 8 tree or he eT ES ee EAL SEE RARE APE OR HH HE RT

तवासनं द्विजगवां पारमेष्ठयं जगत्पते। भवाय श्रेयसे भूत्ये क्षेमाय विजयाय च ।१३॥

Narada resumed : Hiranyakagipu, O king (Yudhisthira), (now) wished to make himself
invincible, free from old age and death and the sole monarch of the three worlds, having no
rival. (1) Inthe valley of Mount Mandara he practised asceticism of the severest type, keeping
(both) his arms lifted up and his gaze fixed on the sky, and touching the ground with his great
toes. (2) With the (dazzling) splendour of his matted locks he shone as the sun with its rays
at the time of final dissolution. While he was (thus) practising austerities, the gods (that had
been dislodged from their home took advantage of his absence and) returned to their
(respective) abodes. (3) The smoky fire of asceticism sprung from the crown of his head
spread on all sides and began to scorch the higher and the lower worlds as well as the
intermediate region. (4) The rivers and the oceans swelled; the earth with its (seven) main
divisions and mountains shook; stars and planets shot out (from their respective positions)
and (all) the ten directions flamed forth. (5) Scorched by that fire, the gods left heaven and
went to the realm of Brahma and submitted to the creator (as follows):—"Tormented by the
asceticism of Hiranyakasipu (the chief of the demons), O god of gods, O lord of the universe,
we can no longer stay in heaven. (Pray,) devise some remedy against it, O perfect one, if you
think fit, before the worlds that bear tributes to you perish, O universal lord ! (6-7) The
following is his avowed purpose in practising the austerities so hard to perform. Although it
is not unknown to you, yet listen to what is being submitted (by us). (8) 'Having evolved this
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) creation by virtue of his devotion to asceticism
and Yoga (contemplation), Brahma (the supreme deity) occupies his abode (Satyaloka),
higher than all (other) spheres. (9) Through increasing devotion to austerities and Yoga
(concentration of mind) and because time and the soul are eternal, | shall likewise secure
that very position for myself. (10) By (sheer) strength of asceticism | shall change the world
order (by exalting sin and depreciating virtue and by driving away the gods and the Rsis to
the subterranean regions and placing the demons in the higher spheres) so completely as
to make it (look altogether) different from what it was before. What shail | do with other
spheres such as the realms of Visnu and so on, which are destroyed by Time at the end of
a Kalpa* (the period covering the entire life of the three worlds)?’ (11) We hear of his
resolution in this behalf and it is with this intention that he has undertaken austerities of the
severest type. (Kindly) do yourself at once what is advisable (under the circumstances), O
lord of the three spheres ! (12) Your supremely exalted position, O lord of the universe, is
conducive to the growth, happiness, prosperity, protection and triumph of the Brahmanas
and the cows. (If he succeeds in replacing you, there is no hope for the Brahmanas and the
cows.)" (13)

इति विज्ञापितो देवैर्भगवानात्मभूर्नृप। परीतो भृगुदक्षाद्यैर्ययौ देत्येश्वराश्रमम् gy
न ददर्श प्रतिच्छन्नं वल्मीकतृणकीचकै: | पिपीलिकाभिराचीर्णमेदस्त्वङ्मांसशोणितम् 1941

तपन्तं तपसा लोकान् यथाभ्रापिहितं रविम्। विलक्ष्य fafa: प्राह प्रहसन् हंसवाहन: 1261
Thus addressed by the gods, O king (Yudhisthira), and accompanied by the sage Bhrgu,
Daksa andothers, the glorious Brahma (the self-born) wentto the hermitage of Hiranyakasipu
(the lord of the Daityas). (14) (At first) he did not find the Daitya, who was covered all over
with ant-hills, grass and bamboos and whose fat, skin, flesh and blood had been consumed
by ants. (15) Brahma (who was mounted on a swan) was (later) amazed to see him scorching

* Even though the divine abode of Lord Visnu and other manifestations of the Supreme Deity are all eternal,
Hiranyakasipu regards them as limited by time because of his perverted intellect, which showed him everything upside down.
