Dis. 22] BOOK EIGHT `` 825

Soi tio tition ear ari to trae १ ङ ङो हो वी ॐ च डो के जी वी जो पि ककेयो ङज .३.३. ३३ ३.३.१३:३.६.३.३:.३ .३-8-.2.३.३.३.६.६.३.३.७.७.७.६.६.३.३.३ ३६

a

HOTT
करोम्यृतं तन्न भवेत् प्रलम्भनं ud तृतीयं कुरु sitet मे निजम् । २ ।
बिभेमि नाहं निरयात् पदच्युतो न पादबन्धाद् व्यसनाद् दुरत्ययात् ।
नैवार्थकृच्छ्व् भवतो विनिग्रहादसाधुवादाद् yea यथा । ३ ।
पुंसां श्लाघ्यतमं मन्ये दण्डमर्हत्तमार्पितम् । यं न माता पिता भ्राता सुहृदश्चादिशान्ति हि । ४ ।.
त्वंकूग्र्पसुराणांन:पारोक्ष्य:परपोगुरु:।योनोऽनेकपदन्धानांविभ्रंज्ञंचक्षुरादिज्ञत्।५।
तेनाहं निगृहीतोऽस्मि भवता भूरिकर्मणा । बद्धश्च वारुणै: uated न च व्यथे । |
पितामहो मे भवदीयसंमत: प्रह्राद आविष्कृतसाधुवाद: |

किमात्मनानेन जहाति योऽन्तत: किं रिक्थहारै: स्वजनाख्यदस्युभि: |
किंजाययास्रंसृतिहेतुभूत्तयामर्त्यस्यगेहै:क्तिपैहत्युषोव्यय:।९।
ea स निश्चित्य frame महानगाधबोधो भवत: पादपद्मम् ।
ध्रुवं प्रपेदे ह्यकुतोभयं जनाद् भीत: स्वपक्षक्षपणस्य सत्तम: 1201
इदं कृतान्तान्तिकवर्ति जीवितं ययाध्रुवं स्तब्धमतिर्न बुध्यते 1221

Bali submitted : O illustrious One, if You consider the vow made by me to be untrue, O
hief of the gods, | shall (presently) justify it, inasmuch as it was not intended to deceive You.
‘ray, place Your third footstep on my head (which is certainly more valuable than my
ossessions taken together). (2) Fallen as | (already) am from my position (sovereignty of
18 three worlds), | am not so very afraid of damnation nor of being bound with cords nor
again) of a calamity which cannot be easily got rid of, much less of a financial crisis, (nay,)
ot (even) of punishment at Your hands, as of being called ignoble. (3) | regard, as most
\udable for persons, punishment inflicted by the most worthy, (which is’a blessing in
isguise and) which as a matter of fact no mother, father, brother or friends can mete out.(4)
isguised as an enemy, you are indeed the greatest benefactor to us, Asuras—You, who
ave vouchsafed vision in the shape of a fall (from power) to us, (who were) blinded with
‘rogance from manifold causes, and by nursing (a feeling of) deep-rooted enmity towards
hom many an Asura has actually attained perfection (in the form of final beatitude), which
ily those possessed of exclusive devotion could attain. (5-6) By You as such of manifold
tivity have | been taken prisoner and bound with the cords of Varuna (the god of water).
et | feel neither much ashamed nor afflicted (thereby). (7) My grandfather, Prahrada, who

esteemed by Your devotees and whose reputation as a pious soul is manifest, was
Ibjected to a variety of tortures by his own father (Hiranyakasipu), Your (sworn) enemy,
nly) because he was devoted to You. (8) "What purpose ofa mortal will be served through
is body, which will ultimately abandon him? What will be gained (by him) through robbers
issing under the name of kinsfolk and carrying away his wealth? What object (of his) will
? accomplished through a wife either, who is instrumental in bringing him transmigration,
1d what useful purpose of his will be served through houses? In (love for) these is involved
