366 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 59

Sette trees ERE ROT TUNER ECE OEE ER EONS ere ET LEK E ATTA EH MARTH EEA H

down the (ramparts of} mountains with His mace, (known by the name of Kaumodaki), the
fortifications of weapons with His shafts, (the belts of) fire, water and wind with His discus
(Sudargana) and the snares laid by Mura with His sword. (4) He blew down the engines (fixed
on the ramparts) and broke down the hearts of the gallant (defenders) with the (blasts of) His
(famous) conch (Paficajanya), and the fortification wall with His massive mace. (5)

पाञ्चजन्यध्वनि श्रुत्वा युगान्ताशानिभीषणम् । मुर: FAIA उत्तस्थौ दैत्य: पञ्चझिरा जलात् । ६ ।
त्रिशूलमुद्यम्य सुदुर्निरीक्षणो युगान्तसूर्यानलरोचिरुल्बण: |
असंस्रिलोकीमिव पञ्चभिर्मुखेरभ्यद्रवत्तार्क्यसुतं यथोरग: । ७ ।
आवबिध्य qs तरसा vent fra वक्मैर्व्यनदत् a पञ्चभि: ।
सरोदसी सर्वदिशोऽन्तरं महानापूरयन्नण्डकटाहमावृणोत् । ८ ।
तदापतद् बवै त्रिशिखं गरुत्मते हरि: हराभ्यामभिनत्निधौजसा |
मुखेषु तं चापि ङारैरताडयत् तस्मै गदां सोऽपि रुषा व्यमुञ्चत । ९ ।
तामापतन्तीं गदया Tet मृधे गदागत्रजो निर्बिभिदे सहस्रधा ।
उद्यम्य बाहूनभिधावतोऽजित: शिरांसि चक्रेण FE लीलया ।१०॥
व्यसुर पपाताम्भसि कृत्तशीर्षो निकृत्तशृङ्खोऽद्रिरिवेन्द्रतेजसा |
mene: सप्त पितुर्वधातुरा: प्रतिक्रियामर्षजुष: समुद्यता: ।११॥
ताम्रोऽनन्तरिंक्ष श्रवणो विभावसुर्वसुर्नभस्वानरुणश्च सप्तम: ।
पीठं पुरस्कृत्य चमूपति ya भोमप्रयुक्ता fem धृतायुधा: ।१२॥
प्रायुञ्जतासाद्य AAG गदा: ङाक्त्यृष्टिशूलान्यजिते रुषोल्बणा: |
तच्छस्त्रकूटं wan स्वमार्गणैरमोघवीर्यस्तिलशश्चकर्त ह ।१३॥
तान् पं ठमुख्याननयद् क्मक्षय निवृक्तहाँ]षींरूभुंज = घ्रवर्मण: |
स्वानीकपानच्युतचक्रसायकैस्तथा निरस्तान् नरको धरासुत: ।१४॥
निरीक्ष्य दुर्मर्षण आस्ररवन्मदैर्गजै:॥ पयोधिप्रभवैर्निराक्रमत्।
ge सभार्यं गरुडोपरि स्थितं सूर्योपरिष्टात् सतडिद्घनं यथा ।
कृष्णं स तस्मै व्यसृजच्छतघ्नीं dens at युगपत् स्म विव्यधु: ।१५॥
ध्रविग्रहं wat ada हताश्वकुञ्जरम् ILE |
Hearing the blast of Pafcajanya, terrific as the clap of thunder (heard) at the end ofa
Kalpa (marking the dissolution of the universe), the five-headed demon Mura rose from
under the water (of the moat), where he had been lying asleep. (6) Lifting up his trident, the
terrible demon, who shone like the sun and fire appearing at the end of a Kalpa and (as such)
was difficult to gaze at, darted at the Lord, even as a serpent would rush at Garuda (son of the
sage Kasyapa), devouring as it were (all) the three worlds with his five (gaping) mouths. (7)
Brandishing his trident and hurling it with force at Garuda, the demon roared with (all) his five
mouths. Filling the horizon and the atmosphere as well as all the four quarters, the great roar
covered the entire cosmos. (8) By a pair of shafts discharged with (great) vigour Sri Krsna
split into three the trident even as it came flying at Garuda and struck in return his (wide open)

mouths with (more) shafts. Mura too hurled his mace in indignation at Sri Krsna. (9) With
His own mace SriKrsna (elder Brother of Gada) split into thousands of splinters the said mace
