440 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 76
+ ११११ ७० ०५० 8१43 3

क्तने -नचनवि ने न 38२3 १ २२०२ २२ २०२२ २.२.२०२3 २२० नशमकाशाधाघकशररसककछककसमर ककक

निरुद्ध्य सेनया ज्ञाल्वो महत्या भरतर्षभ। पुरीं बभञ्जोपवनान्युद्यानानि च सर्वश: । ९ ।
सगोपुराणि द्वाराणि प्रासादाट्टालतोलिका: ! विहारान् स विमानाग्र्यान्निपेतु: TAGES: । १०॥
fret द्रुमाश्चाशानय: wot आसारशर्करा: | प्रचण्डश्चक्रवातोऽभूद् रजसाऽऽच्छादिता feat: 1921
sea सौभेन कृष्णस्य नगरी भरृशाम्।नाभ्यपद्यत wt wifagk यथा मही ।१२॥
प्रद्युम्नो भगवान् वीक्ष्य बाध्यमाना निजा: प्रजा: । मा भरैष्टेत्यभ्यधाद् वीरो रथारूढो महायहा: । १३॥
सात्यकिश्चारुदेष्णश्च साम्बोऽक्रूर: सहानुज:। हार्दिक्यो भानुविन्दश्च गदश्च ज्जुकसारणौ ।१४॥
am च we रथयूथपयूथपा: । निर्ययुर्दंशिता गुप्ता रथेभाश्वपदातिभि: ।१५॥
तत: प्रववृते qe शाल्वानां बदुभि: सह। यथासुराणां विब्रुधैस्तुमुलं लोमहर्षणम् । १६॥
ag सौभपतेर्माया दिव्यास्त्रै रुक्मिणीसुत: । क्षणेन नाशयामास Ast an इवोष्णगु: ।१७॥
विव्याध पञ्चविंशत्या स्वर्णपुङ्खैरयोमुखै: । शाल्वस्य ध्वजिनीपालं at: सन्नतपर्वभि: ect
छतेनाताडयच्छाल्वमेकैकेनास्य सैनिकान्। दशभिर्दंशभिर्नेतॄन् वाहनानि त्रिभिस्रिभि: ।१९॥
तदद्भुतं महत् कर्म प्रद्युम्नस्य महात्मन:। दृष्टा तं पूजयामासु: सर्वे स्वपरसैनिका: । २०॥
बहुरूपैकरूपं तद् gad न च दृश्यते। मायामयं मयकृतं दुर्विभाव्यं परैरभूत्।२१॥
क्वचिद् भूमौ क्वचिद् व्योम्नि गिरिमूर्नि जले afer अलातचक्रवद् भ्राम्यत् सोभं तद् दुरवस्थितम् । २२ 1
यत्र यत्रोपलक्ष्येत ससोभ: सहसैनिक: | शाल्वस्ततस्ततोऽमुञ्चन् SRL सात्वतयूथपा: ।२३॥

j 2: । पीड्यमानपुरानीक: जाल्वोऽंमुह्यत् wa: । २४॥

Pariksit, Salva besieged the city with a large army and engaged himself in the wholesale
destruction of its gardens and parks, the gateways with their massive superstructures, the
mansions with their upper chambers and compound wall and the places of recreation.
Volleys of destructive weapons rained from that huge aerial car. (9-10) Blocks of stone, trees,
thunderbolts serpents and hailstones were showered on the city, and a fearful tornado was
let loose over it, filling the quarters with dust. (11) Just as in the days of yore the earth suffered
under the scourge of the demon Tripura, even so the city of Dwaraka was subjected to untold
suffering by Salva’s aerial car, Saubha. The people could not find respite (even for a
moment). (12) Observing the distress of the people, the renowned warrior, Bhagavan
Pradyumna, mounted his chariot and cheered them by saying ‘Fear not’. (13) Satyaki,
Carudesna, Samba, Akrura and his younger brothers, Krtavarma, Bhanuvinda, Gada,
Suka, Sarana and many other big generals followed him with mighty bows in their hands.
They were all protected with armours and were guarded by chariots, elephants, horses and
foot-soldiers. (14-15) Just as in the days of yore there was a bitter conflict between the
Devas and Asuras, even so a fierce and thrilling battle ensued between the soldiers of
Salva and the Yadavas. (16) With the help of his celestial weapons Pradyumna broke in
an instant the magic spell of Salva, the owner of Saubha, even as the sun dispels the
darkness of the night. (17) With twenty-five arrows having feathers of gold andiron tips and
with the knots of their wood well polished, he pierced the commander-in-chiet of Salva's
army. (18) With a hundred more he struck Salva (himself) and discharged one arrow each
at his soldiers, ten each at his charioteers and three each at his horses. (19) Seeing this
great and wonderful feat of arms exhibited by the valiant Pradyumna, the soldiers on both
sides admired him. (Pariksit,) the aerial car of Salva constructed by Maya contained such
magical contrivances that now it appeared as many, and now as only one, nowit appeared
in the sky, and now disappeared altogether. The Yadavas, therefore, found it difficult to
discover where it was at a particular moment. (20-21) Now it descended on the ground,

