Dis. 25 } BOOK THREE 247

LAMBA H CEE CHE CEASE CHS He SETH CRRA HRTEM AH NH HEE ERAT OEE EH HHO ton eit

Gunas (modes of Prakrti), yet brings them to light, and who had been realized through
exclusive Devotion. (43) Free from egotism and the sense of mineness, indifferent to
pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, etc., etc.),
and viewing all with the same eye, Kardama perceived his own self everywhere. His mind
had turned inward and was perfectly composed, and the self-possessed sage looked like
an ocean without waves. (44) His mind being fixed through supreme Devotion on the all-
knowing Lord Vasudeva, the Self (Inner Controller) of all embodied souls, he was now
free from the bondage of ignorance. (45) He perceived the Lord, his own Self, as present
in all living beings, and all living beings in the Lord, His own Self. (46) In this way
Kardama, who had no desire and was free from malice, who was even-minded towards
all, and who had developed Devotion to the Lord, attained union with Him. (47)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse, forming part of the "Story
of Lord Kapila" in Book Three of the great and glorious
Bhagavaia-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

seb Pt Ber ९९
PISS Si oe

अथ पञ्चविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXV

Lord Kapila expatiates on the glory of Devotion in response

to the query of mother Devahiti
Te उवाच

कपिलस्तत्त्वसंख्याता भगवानात्मायया | जात: स्वयमज: साक्षादात्मप्रज्ञप्तये FOL १ ।

न ह्यस्य asin: पुंसां वरिम्ण: सर्वयोगिनाम्। विश्रुतौ श्रुतदेवस्य a तृप्यन्ति मेऽसव: । २ ।
,यद्यद्विधत्ते भगवान् स्वच्छन्दात्माऽऽत्ममायया । तानि A श्रद्दधानस्य कीर्तन्यान्यनुकीर्तय । ३ ।
Saunaka said : Kapila, who expounded the true nature of the fundamental principles,

was no other than the birthless Lord (Narayana), descended of his own free will and
through His own Maya (wonderful creative energy) in order to teach humanity the truth of
the Self. (1) Although | have often heard the stories of the Lord, my senses are not sated
with hearing the glory of Lord Kapila, the best of all men and the foremost of all Yogis. (2)
Having assumed by His own Maya a personality conforming to the will of His devotees,

whatever the Lord does is all worth singing. Therefore, kindly narrate all those doings to
me, full of reverence as | am. (3)

सूत उवाच
द्वैपायनसखस्त्वेवं मैत्रेयो भगवांस्तथा । प्राहेदं विदुरं प्रीत आन्वीक्षिक्यां प्रचोदित: । ४ ।
Sita said : Urged in this way to expound the true nature of the fundamental principles,

ihe worshipful Maitreya, a friend of the sage Dwaipayana, (Vedavyasa) addressed Vidura
as follows according to the spirit of his enquiry. (4)

मैत्रेय उवाच
पितरि प्रस्थितेऽरण्यं मातु: प्रियचिकीर्षया । तस्मिन्बिन्दुसरेऽवात्सीद्धगवान्कपिल: किल । ५ ।
