330 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 51

त्तचि न त्तच LUNA Eee eee eee HEHEHE

Maya, (nay,) above the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and one withouta second. (57) Lorg
afflicted in this world with the fruits of actions and being tormented with the impressions left
on the mind by those actions, nay, with my six (internal) foes (in the shape of the five senses
of perception and the mind) not (yet) free from thirst and having (therefore) not (so far) been
able to secure peace (of mind), | have somehow duly reached, O Bestower of Knowlecge
concerning Yourself, Your lotus Feet, which are divorced from fear and grief and which are
all truth, O Supreme Spirit. (Pray.) protect me, O Lord, distressed as | am. (58)
7 श्रीभगवानुवाच

सार्वभौम महाराज मतिस्ते विमलोर्जिता। at: प्रलोभितस्यापि न कामैर्विहता aa: 1५९1

प्रलोभितो वरैर्यत्त्वमप्रमादाय fate तत्। न धीर्मय्येकभक्तानामाशीर्भिर्भिद्यते क्वचित् । ६०1

युञ्जानानामभक्तानां प्राणायामादिभिर्मन: | अक्षीणवासनं राजन् दृश्यते पुनरुत्थितम् RI

विचरस्व caf कामं मय्यावेशितमानस: । अस्त्वेव नित्यदा तुभ्यं भक्तिर्मय्यनपायिनी ise

क्षात्रधर्मस्थितो जन्तून् न्यवधीर्मृगयादिभि: । समाहितस्तत्तपसा जह्यघं मदुपाश्रित: 1831

Wet राजन् सर्वभूतसुहत्तम: । भूत्वा द्विजवरस्त्वं वै मामुपैष्यसि केवलम् ex

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे मुचुकुन्दस्तुतिर्नामंकपञ्चाशात्तमोऽध्याय: 148 |
The glorious Lord replied : 0 great king, O ruler of the entire globe, your mind is free

from (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment, greed etc.) and powerful (capable of
perceiving the highest truth) in that it could not be lured by (offers of) enjoyments, even
though you were tempted with boons of your choice. (59) Know that it was to show (to the
world) your vigilance (in the matter of choosing the right thing and rejecting the false) that you
were tempted with boons. The judgment of those who are exclusively devoted to Me can never
be perverted by (offers of) sensuous enjoyments) (which are coveted by the world). (60) The
mind of those other than devotees, even though they try to curb it through breath-control etc.,
is seen (to get) riotous again, its craving for enjoyment having not (yet) ceased (which is
possibile only through Devotion), O king ! (61) With your mind set on Me, wander the earth
at pleasure. May your devotion to Me continue uninterrupted for ever as a matter of course.
(62) Devoted to the duties of a Ksatriya (viz., the protection of your subjects), you killed game
(of various kinds) through hunting etc.; (therefore) looking upon Me as your asylum and
collected (in mind), get rid of the sinful tendency (acquired through such practices) by
recourse to asceticism. (63) Being reborn as a Brahmana (the formost of the twice-born),
most friendly to all created beings, in your (very) next incarnation, O Mucukunda, you will
surely attain to Me, the Absolute. (64)

Thus ends the fifty-first discourse, entitled “"Mucukunda's Eulogy (of the Lord),”
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Asinetuet:
