Dis. 12 BOOK TWELVE 717

SRSA A MAA ASS ALA AAA ARLE AAS ALIA TELE LIISA IIIA ESRB SIE SIH IBA SEHR

are च या स्रीणामाद्या प्रकृतिरुत्तमा। सन्तानो धर्मपत्नीनां कर्दमस्य प्रजापते: 1221
wat भगवत: कपिलस्य महात्मन: । tages संवाद: कपिलेन च eta । १३॥

The dialogue between Vidura and Uddhava and then between Vidura and Maitreya; an
inquiry regarding the (Bhagavata-) Purana; the dormant state of the Supreme Person (during
the period of Final Dissolution). (8) Then follows a description of the flowering of Prakrti (in
the form of disturbance caused in the equilibrium of the three Gunas) and the coming into
being of the seven categories which are both of the nature of a cause and an effect (viz., of
the Mahat-tattva into the cosmic ego and of the latter into the five Tanmatras or subtle
elements) and the (gradual) crystallization of the (five) Tanmatras into the (five) gross
elements and the eleven Indriyas (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action
and the mind, which are all of the nature of an effect only since they do not give rise to any
further modification). Then ensues a description of the evolution of the cosmic egg, from
which appears Brahma (the offspring of the Cosmic Person). (9) (Then) follows a description
of Time in its subtle and gross states; the sprouting of the fourteen worlds (in the form of a
lotus from the navel of the Cosmic Person) and how Hiranyaksa was killed (by the Lord in
the form of the divine Boar) in the course of His attempt to lift up the earth from (the bottom
of) the ocean. (10) The evolution of the higher (heavenly and aerial), subhuman and
subterranean (Asurika)orders of created beings and the appearance ‘of Rudra (the god of
destruction) and subsequently the division of Brahma in two halves, one constituting a male
and the other a female, from which sprang up the Manu named Swayambhuva (because
born of Brahma, the self-born) and Satartipa, the first and foremost pattern of womanhood.
(Then) follows the description of the progeny (in the shape of nine daughters) of the revered
wife (Devahiti) of the sage Kardama, a lord of creation. (11-12) The descent of the Supreme
Spiritas Lord Kapila and the dialogue of Devahati with Kapila, the embodimentof wisdom. (13)
(Here ends the theme of Book Three.)

नवब्रह्मसमुत्पत्तिर्दक्षयज्ञविनाशानम् । ध्रुवस्व चरितं पश्चात्पृथो: प्राचीनबर्हिष: । १४॥
ana च संवादस्तत: Sand द्विजा: । नाभेस्ततोऽनुचरितमृषभस्य भरतस्य च ।१५॥
द्वीपवर्षसमुद्राणां `गिरिनद्युपवर्णनम्। ज्योतिश्चक्रस्य संस्थानं पातालनरकस्थिति: । १६।

The progeny (through the nine daughters of Kardama) of the nine lords of creation (Marici
and others); the destruction of the sacrificial performance undertaken by Daksa (the tenth
lord of creation); the narrative of (the devotee) Dhruva and then of King Prthu; the dialogue
between King Pracinabarhi and the (celestial) sage Narada and next follows the narrative
of King Priyavrata, O Branhmanas ! Then follow the stories of Kings Nabhi, Rsabha and
Bharata. (14-15) A description of the Dwipas (the nine broad divisions of the terrestrial
plane), Vargas (subdivisions of the Dwipas) and the oceans (dividing the Dwipas) and (then)
of the (principal) mountains and rivers (forming part of the Dwipas); the disposition of the
stellar sphere and the location of the (seven) subterranean worlds and the infernal regions
(closely followed by the story of Ajamita, illustrating the means of averting descent into hell,
in Book Six). (16) (Here ends the theme of Books Four and Five.)

दक्षजन्म प्रचेतोभ्यस्तत्पुत्रीणां च सन्तति: । यतो देवासुरनरास्तिर्यङ्नगखगादय: । १७॥
ape wa fed pris दितेर्दिजा: । दैत्येश्वस्य चरितं प्रह्रादस्य महात्मन: 1261
The descent of Daksa from the Pracetas; the progeny of his daughters, from whose

womb appeared the gods, human beings and demons, animals, the immobile creation (the
vegetable kingdom), birds and so on. {17} Then follows an account, 0 Brahmana sages, of

