680 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

SME WEE ERENCE ME NE न EMER OE EE SS MLTR GET ME MOTE ETH MMAR RIG MEM

charitable gifts and muttering of prayers as it does when the infinite Lord is enthroned in the
heart.(48) Therefore, with all your being O king, instal Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of
Brahma and Siva) in your heart, thinking of Him with a concentrated mind while dying, You
will thereby attain the supreme goal. (49) The Lord, who is the Supreme Ruler (of the
universe), the Soul and Shelter of all, deserves to be meditated upon at all times; (for) those
who are about to die meditate upon Him (as a result of practice incessantly carried on while
living) He !eads them to the state of oneness with Him, 0 dear Pariksit ! (60) Indeed there
is one great virtue possessed by the Kali age, the storehouse of (all) evils, O Pariksit ! By
merely chanting the names and glories of Sri Krsna one is freed from (all) attachments and
reaches the Supreme. (51) What is attained in the Satyayuga by one contemplating on Lord
Visnu, in Tret& by one who propitiates Him through sacrifices, and in Dwapara through
worship (of the Lord), is attained in the Kali age (merely) by chanting the name and singing
the praises of Sri Hari.(52)

Thus ends the third discourse in Book Tweive of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

सि
LOD PLE OD

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

The Fourfold Pralaya
श्रीगुक उवाच

कालस्ते परमाण्वादिर्विपरार्धावधिर्नृप | कथितो युगमानं च yg] कल्पलयावपि । १ ।
aga च ब्रह्मणो दिनमुच्यते। स कल्पो यत्र मनवश्चतुर्दशा विर्शापते । २ |
तदन्ते प्रलयस्तावान् ब्राह्मी रात्रिरुदाहता । त्रयो लोका Sa तत्र कल्पन्ते प्रलयाय हि । ३ ।
wa नैमित्तिक: प्रोक्त: प्रलयो aa विश्चसृक ! होतेऽनन्तासनो विश्वमात्मसात्कृत्य चात्मभू: । ४ |
द्विपरार्थे त्वतिक्रान्ते sao: wifi: । तदा प्रकृतय: सप्त कल्पन्ते प्रलयाय वै । ५ ।
एष weal wr sed यत्र लीयते। आण्डकोशस्तु सङ्घातो विघातं उपसादिते । ६ |
wha: झञतवर्षाणि apt राजन् न adit तदा निरन्ने ह्यन्योन्यं भक्षमाणा: क्षुधार्दिता: । ७ |
क्षयं यास्यन्ति शनकै: कालेनोपद्रुता: प्रजा: । सामुद्रं Sek भौमं रसं सांवर्तको रवि: । ८ ।
wane: शून्यान् भूविवरानथ।उपर्यध: समन्ताच्च शिखाभिर्वह्निसूर्ययो: ।१०॥
दह्यमानं विभात्यण्डं दग्धगोमयपिण्डवत्। तत: प्रचण्डपवनो वर्षाणामधिकं दातम् ।११॥
ut: सांवर्तको aft धूम्रं खं रजसाऽऽवृतम्। ततो मेघकुलान्यङ्ग चित्रवर्णान्यनेकश: ।१२॥
ad asi वर्षन्ति नदन्ति रभसस्वनै: । तत एकोदकं fad ब्रह्माण्डविवरान्तरम् 123
Sri Suka began again: The divisions of Time commencing from a Paramanu (its

minutest division) and ending with two Parardhas (comprising the life-time of Brahma) have
already been described to you, as also the duration of the four Yugas (in Discourse XI of Book
