Dis. 12] BOOK THREE 183

द्छ Te ae wr eee EB RT HH He MT

fan निगृह्यमाणोऽपि भ्रुवोर्मध्यात्प्रजापते: | सद्योऽजायत तन्मन्यु: कुमारो नीललोहित: । ७ ।

स a ete देवानां पूर्वजो भगवान् wa: । नामानि कुरु मे धात: स्थानानि च जगद्गुरो । ८ ।

इति तस्य aa: पाद्मो भगवान् परिपालयन्। अभ्यधाद भद्रया वाचा मा रोदीस्तत्करोमि ते । ९ ।

aed: सुरश्रेष्ठ Wen sa बालक:।ततस्त्वामभिधास्यन्ति ara रुद्र इति प्रजा: ।१०॥

हृदिन्द्रियाण्यसुरव्योम वायुरग्निर्जलं मही । सूर्यश्चन्द्रस्तपश्चैव स्थानान्यग्रे कृतानि Bee

मन्युर्मनुर्महिनसो महाञ्छिव ऋतध्वज: । उग्ररेता भव: कालो वामदेवो धृतव्रत: 1221

धीर्वृत्तिरुशानोमा च नियुत्सर्पिरिलाम्बिका । इरावती सुधा dan रुद्राण्यो रुद्र ते स्रिय: ।१३॥

गृहाणैतानि नामानि स्थानानि च aaa: | एभि: Ga प्रजा बह्वी: प्रजानामसि यत्पति: । १४॥

sales: स गुरुणा भगवान्नीललोहित: । सत्त्वाकृतिस्वभावेन ससर्जात्मसमा: प्रजा: ।१५॥

रुद्राणां रुद्रसृष्टानां समन्ताद ग्रसतां जगत्। निशाम्यासंख्यशो यूथान् प्रजापतिरशङ्कत । १६

ae प्रजाभि: सृष्टाभिरीदृशीभि: सुरोत्तम। मया सह दहन्तीभिर्दिशश्चक्षुर्भिरुल्बणे: 1901

तप amas ws ते सर्वभूतसुखावहम्।तपसॆव wand am विश्वमिदं varied

तपसैव = ज्योतिर्भगवन्तमधोक्षजम्। सर्वभूतगुहावासमञ्जसा विन्दते पुमान्।१९।
Maitreya continued : Thus | have told you, O Vidura, the glory of the Supreme Spirit
under the name of Time. Now hear from me how Brahma (the repository of the Vedas)
proceeded with the work of creation. (1) To begin with, Brahma (the first maker) evolved the
five varieties of ignorance” viz., Tamas (ignorance about one's own self), Moha (self-
identification with the body etc.), Mahamoha (the craving for enjoyment), Tamisra (anger)
and Andhatamisra (looking upon death as one s own end). (2) He was, however, not pleased
with himself to see this most wicked creation. Through his mind, purified by meditation on
the Lord Brahma (the self-born) then evolved a creation (different from the above), viz., the
sages Sanaka and Sanandana and Sanatana and Sanatkumara, ‘who refrained from all
worldly activity and were Urdhvaretast (lifelong celibates). (3-4) Brahma (the self-born) said
to these sons, "Dear sons, do you beget offspring." They, however, were little inclined to do
so, since they had set their heart on Lord Vasudeva as the highest goal and had taken a vow
of renunciation as a road to liberation. (5) Thus disregarded by his own sons, who had flouted
his command, Brahma strove to curb the fierce anger generated in him. (6) But notwith-
standing his effort to restrain it by force of reason, the passion of Brahma (the lord of created
beings) forthwith broke through the middle of his brows in the form of a boy of dark-red
hue. (7) The body, who was no other than Lord Rudra (the eldest-born of the gods), cried,
"Give me names, O Creator, and also allow me abodes, father of the world." (8) Intending
to comply with this prayer of the boy, the worshipful Brahma (who was born of the lotus)
replied in kind tones : "Do not cry, | shall presently do it for you. (9) Since you wept as a
frightened child, O chief of the gods, hence people will call you by the name of Rudra (lit.,
one who weeps). (10) The heart, the senses, the vital air, ether, the air, fire, water, earth, the

* The Visnu-Purana says—
तमोऽविवेको We: स्यादन्त:करणविभ्रम: | Hee विज्ञेयो ग्राम्यभोगसुखैषणा॥
Ct. Patafijali—
अविद्यास्मितारागद्वेषाभिनिवेशा: पञ्च क्लेशा: |
According 10० the great Acarya Visnuswami, the fivefold ignorance consists in Ajfiana (ignorance), Viparyasa (error or
delusion), Bheda (sense of diversity), Bnaya (fear) and Soka (grief).
Tt ‘Urdhvareta’ literally means he whose generative fluid has begun to flow upwards instead of downwards as in the case
