Dis. 11} BOOK ELEVEN 565

eee EE ee ER HE ECCHHA 29 ETE SET ER ERED १४8 29६ 825१ >8॥ 4 eH HE 93४ ETE eS EET ET See AED

and constructing temples, keeping my temples tidy and clean after the manner of a servant
by removing their dust and plastering their floor with cowdung etc., washing their floor and
decorating it with ornamental designs and diagrams in a guileless way (without any
expectation of return); absence of pride and hypocrisy and refraining from making known
one's own services.* One should not uset (for one's own benefit) even the light of a lamp
offered (by oneself or anyone else) to Me (or, to interpret itin another way, one should not offer
to Me even the light of a lamp (already) offered (to Me or to any other deity).+(34—40). One
should (on the other hang) offer to Me whatever is most favoured with the world as well as
whatever is most liked by himself; for such an offering is capable of yielding immortality. (41)

सूर्योऽग्निर्ब्रह्मणो गावो aera: खं मरुज्जलम्। भूरात्मा सर्वभूतानि भद्र पूजापदानि मे ।४२॥
सूर्ये तु विद्यया wen हविषाग्नौ ada माम्। आतिथ्येन तु fase गोष्ठङ्ग यवसादिना ॥४३॥
वैष्णवे बन्धुसत्कृत्या fe खे ध्याननिष्ठया । वायौ मुख्यधिया aa द्रव्यैस्तोयपुरस्कृतै: ee!
स्थण्डिले मन्त्रहदयैर्भोगैरात्मानमात्मनि । क्षेत्रज्ञं सर्वभूतेषु समत्वेन यजेत APL ॥४५॥
धिष्ण्येष्वेष्निति मदरूपं शङ्खचक्रगदाम्बुजै: । युक्तं चतुर्भुजं शान्तं ध्यायन्नर्चेत् समाहित: 1x |
इष्टापूर्तेन मामेवे यो यजेत समाहित:। लभते मयि सद्धक्तिं मत्स्मृति: साधुसेवया ive!
प्रायेण भक्तियोगेन सत्सङ्गेन विनोद्धव | नोपायो विद्यते ae प्रायणं fe सतामहम् । ४८
अथैतत् परमं गुह्यं शृण्वतो यदुनन्दन । सुगोप्यमपि वक्ष्यामि त्वं मे ye: qe सखा xe!

The sun, fire, the Brahmana cows, a votary of Lord Visnu, the sky, the air, water, earth,
one’s own body and all living beings are the media of My worship, O good one ! (42) In the
sunone should worship Me by (waiting upon Me with) hymns forming part of the three Vedas,
in (the sacred) fire, by (pouring) oblations; in a worthy Brahmana, through hospitality of
course; and in cows, through green grass etc., 0 dear Uddhava; in a votary of Lord Visnu,
through attentions due to a relation; in the cavity of one's heart, through fixity in meditation,
in the air, through the thought that it is the life-giving principle running through the entire
universe; in the water, through articles of worship followed by water (itself); inaraised ground
ee य

“A Smetilext says ;- धर्म: क्षरति कीर्तनात्।

“A virtue [s spent by being made known through one’s own hips."

+ttus for this reason thatin order to guard against the offence of seeing things with the help ot such tightit has been enjoined
that a light ottered to a deity should contain a double wick. Ot course, this does not debar us from accepting for one’s own use
in a spirit ot devotion the offerings made to a deity in the shape ot eatables, sandal-paste, garland end scent etc., which has
been extolted In the scriptures es conducive to Liberation. The scripture says:—

eed मुखे नाम नैवेद्यमुदरे हं: । पादोदकं च निर्माल्यं मस्तके यस्य मोऽच्युत:॥

“In the Kali age the same virtue eccrues trom the food offered to Lord Visnu to those partaking of it es has been declared
fo result from a fast undertaken for a whole month as many as six times. He is identical with Lord Visnu, who carrles a mentel
image of Lord $ri Hari In his heart, His name on his tips, the tood offered to Him in his stomach, nay, the water In which His
feet have been washed and flowers etc., offered to Him on the head.”

The Smrti says :-

विष्णोर्निवेदितान्रेन यष्टव्यं  देवतान्तरम् । पितृभ्यश्चैव तद्देयं तदानन्त्याय  कल्पते॥
पितॄशेणं तु चो दद्याद्धस्ये परमात्मने। रेतोधा: पितरस्तस्य भवन्ति क्लेशभागिन:॥

*One ought to propitiate other deities by means of food (already) ottered to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Deity); ney, it should
be ottered to the manes as well (during the Sraddha ceremony), es such consecrated food {it offered to the manes) is capable
of yielding an immortal truit. In the case (however) of him who offers the food already ottered to the manes to Lord Sri Harl,
the Supreme Spirit, Ihe manes who were responsible for his birth undergo (great) suffering.”
