496 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 87

२ ०० ००० ० RS ० ७ ० ०० ० ७.० EERE REE २ ७.०.७ ७ BE ० ७.० ७ ७ SEES SE ०० ० ७.०.७.२.७ ० ०७ ०० SEE ७ ० ७० ७ RES ० ७० ७ .५.० ० ७ ० ०० ७० ७ ५७

mind and so on). (35)
सत इदमुत्थितं सदिति aay तर्कहतं व्यभिचरति क्व च क्क च मृषा न तथोभययुक् |
व्यवहृतये विकल्प इषितोऽन्धपरम्परया भ्रमयति भारती a उरुवृत्तिभिरुक्थजडान्। 36 1

If it is argued that this (objective) universe is real in that it has evolved from the Real
(God), this proposition is surely disproved by critical examination. The fact of an effect
following the nature of its cause varies in certain cases (as for example a son is found
to be different from his father); while in some (other) cases the evolute of a real
substance is known to be false (just as the perception of a serpent following from a real
substance, viz., a rope is false). (It may be objected here that it is not the rope alone
but the rope coupled with ignorance which is responsible for its being mistaken for a
snake. Our reply to this objection is that) the world (too) is a product of both (viz.,
Brahma and Avidya); hence it is not real. (If the world is held to be real because it serves
our purpose and discharges some function too, our reply is that) for explaining worldly
transactions the illusory nature of the universe is (on the other hand) more welcome (to
us); for worldly transactions will be carried on by blindly following past traditions. Your
word (in the shape of Vedic texts declaring the reward of ritual acts as real) deludes by
its manifold powers of expressing, indicating or suggesting a meaning (only) those dull-
witted persons who have been blinded by their excessive faith in (Vedic) rituals. (36)
Since this (Phenomenal world) neither existed in the beginning (i.e., before creation) nor
will it survive after dissolution, hence it is concluded that during the intervening period
(too) it falsely appears in You, the absolute Existence. Therefore it is likened (by us, the
Vedas) to the ways of the diverse manifestations (e.g., an earthen jar, ear-ring etc.) of
material substances (like earth, gold and steel). Therefore, ignorant are they who
recognize this unreal world, a (mere) play of fancy, to be real. (37)

स यदजया त्वजामनुशयीत गुणांश्च जुघन् भजति ससूपतां तदनु मृत्युमपेतभग:।
त्वमुत जहासि तामहिरिव त्वचमात्तभगो महसि महीयसेऽष्टगुणितेऽपरिमेयभग:। 3¢1
यदि न समुद्धरन्ति यतयो हृदि कामजटा दुरधिगमोऽसतां हदि गतोऽस्मृतकण्ठमणि: ।
असुतृपयोगिनामुभयतोऽप्यसुखें भगवन्ननपगतान्तकादनधिरूढपदाद् भवत:। 8 |
(Ever) since under the influence of Maya (Your deluding potency) the Jiva (soul)
embraces ignorance (which has no beginning) it identifies itself with a body, senses and
so on (Products of the three Gunas) and then, acquiring the characteristics of these
(viz., the body etc.) undergoes transmigration, its (conscious and blissful) divine nature
being obscured. You, on the other hand, (ever) keep that ignorance away (even) as a
serpent casts off the slough, retaining Your divinity and possessed of infinite power, and
shine in Your eightfold" glory. (38) If strivers (outwardly engaged in subduing their
senses, mind etc.) do not tear the roots of passion planted in their heart, You remain
difficult of access to such vile persons, though (ever) present in their heart (even) like
a gem about the neck of a man, though forgotten by him. And for Yogis (passing by this
name but) given to the gratification of their senses, O Lord, there is misery from both
sides, viz., from Death (on the one hand) that has not turned his back (on him, here)
and (after death, on the other) from You, whose truth remains unrealized (by him). (39)

* The eighliold lory Genotes here the eight Siddhis or supernatural powers enumerated in the works on Yoga,
viz, Anima, Laghima, Mahima, Praptt, Prakamya, Igitva, Vasitva and Kamavasayitva.
