Dis. 20]. .. ~ "BOOK THREE 223

ARR छत्ताजा ot ere: Feit a tie ere eh डाजा eee & ae er hh are ee ह ओ er Re He Ha ae Re Be RT A A BE BT A A a BY ङ ह री
Yd sara
लीलां हिरण्याक्षमवज्ञया ed सञ्जातहर्षो मुनिमाह भारत: । ८ ।
Sita continued : Vidura (a descendant of king Bharata) was delighted to hear the story
of the Lord who, having assumed by His own divine will the semblance of a boar, had enacted
the sport of lifting up the earth from the bottom of the ocean and indifferently killed the demon

Hiranyaksa. He then spoke to the sage as follows. (8)
दुर उवाच
प्रजापतिपति: सृष्टा प्रजासर्गे प्रजापतीन्। किमारभत A ब्रह्मन् प्रब्रूह्यव्यक्तमार्गवित्। ९ |
ये मरीच्यादयो fam aq स्वायम्भुवो-मनु:। ते वै ब्रह्मण आदेशात्कथमेतदभावयन् । १०॥
सद्वितीया: किमसृजन् स्वतन्त्रा sa aig । आहोस्वित्संहता: ad sé स्म समकल्पयन् । ११।
Vidura said : Knowing as you do things unperceived by us, tell me, O holy sage, what
Brahma (the lord of Prajapatis) did for the purpose of creating living beings after evolving the
Prajapatis (lords of created beings). (9) How did the sage Marici and the other Brahmanas as
well as Swayambhuva Manu evolve the creation in obedience to Brahma's command ? (10)
Did they evolve it in conjunction with their wives or remaining independent in their action or
did they all jointly produce it ? (11) -
मेत्रेय उवाच

दैवेन दुर्वितर्क्यण परेणानिमिषेण च । जातक्षोभाद्भगवतो महानासीद् गुणत्रयात् । १२
रज:प्रधानान्महतस्रिलिङ्गो दैवचोदितात्। जात: wast भूतादिर्वियदादीनि ws: 1231
af चैकॆकश: स्रष्टुमसमर्थानि भौतिकम्।संहत्य दैवयोगेन हैममण्डमवासृजन् । १४॥
सोऽरयिष्टाब्धिसलिले आण्डकोशो निरात्मक: । साग्रं वै वर्षसाहस्रमन्ववात्सीत्तमीश्वर: 1241
तस्य नाभेरभूत्पद्मं सहस्रार्कोरुदीधिति। सर्वजीवनिकायौको यत्र स्वयमभूत्स्वराद् 126 |
Maitreya replied: When the equilibrium of the three Gunas (constituting Prakrti or
Primordial Matter) got disturbed through the agency of Prarabdha (the destiny of the
Jivas)—the working of which is difficult to comprehend—the Supreme Spirit presiding over
Prakrti and Kala (the Time-Spirit), as well as through mere proximity to the Lord, the Mahat-
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) was evolved therefrom. (12) From the Mahat-
tattva—in which the element of Rajas predominates—as impelled by the destiny of the Jivas,
was evolved the Ego (the source 0 the five elements), which is of three kinds (according as
itis predominated by Sattva, Rajas or Tamas); and the Ego in its turn evolved many a group
of five principles such as the five gross elements* (ether and so on). (13) Severally unable
to produce the material universe, they combined with the help of the divine energy and were
(now) able to evolve a shining egg. (14) For over one thousand years the egg lay on the
waters of the causal ocean in a lifeless state. After that the Lord entered it (as its presiding
Deity). (15) From the navel of the Lord (as presiding over the egg) sprang a lotus that
possessed the dazzling splendour of a thousand suns and was intended to be the abode of
all living beings. Brahma himself emanated from this very lotus.(16)

सोऽनुविष्टो भगवता a: Ba सलिलाराये । लोकसंस्थां यथापूर्वं निर्ममे संस्थया war ।१७॥

* The other groups of five principles besides the five gross elements are : the five subtle elements, the five senses of
perception, the five organs of action and the two groups of five deities severally presiding over the five senses and the five
organs.
