300 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

आत्रो शा वी कज् कक्रीज HHA CL ALEK HAATH AHHH OHA EHEEAAARERE HAH क क्यै त्वैत्धत्य डा डौ डो L CHAAR LSE LAKH Hae

येऽभ्यागतान् वक्रधियाभिचक्षते आरोपितभ्रूभिरमर्षणाक्षिभि: 1221
`तथारिभिर्न व्यथते शिलीमुखै: sas? eae Ga!
mrt यथा वक्रधियां दुरुक्तिभिर्दिवानिज्ञं तप्यति मर्मताडित: 1१९1
The Lord said : Ithas been well said by you, O good lady, that people go to their relations
even uninvited; but this happens only when the latter's mind is not tainted with malice due
to excessive arrogance and anger born of self-identification with the body. (16) The pride of
the arrogant is heightened and their mind perverted by learning, austerity, opulence, a
charming personality, youth and pedigree, which are the six embellishments for the noble
but a curse to the most wicked; and deprived of their judgment, they fail to perceive the glory
of the most exalted. (17) Considering them as one's own relations, one should never visit the
house of such men of unsteady judgment, who view theirvisitors with a suspicious mind and
with angry and frowning eyes. (18) One whose body has been mutilated with arrows by the’
enemy does not feel the same torture as he who has been cut to the quick by the abusive
words of his own people having a malignant mind. For, while the former is able to sleep (on
receiving proper treatment and nursing), the latter suffers from heartache day and night. (19)

व्यक्तं त्वमुत्कृष्टगते: प्रजापते: प्रियाऽऽत्मजानामसि सुभ्रु सम्मता ।
अथापि मानं न पितु: प्रपत्स्यसे मदाश्रयात्क: परितप्यते यत: 1201
पापच्यमानेन ह्दाऽऽतुरेन्द्रिर समृद्धिभि:॥ पूरुषबुद्धिसाक्षिणाम्।
अकल्प एषामधिरोढुमञ्जसा पदं परं Bf यथासुरा हरिम् । २१।

You are surely the most beloved and esteemed of all the daughters of Daksa (the lord
of created beings) of exalted rank, my charming lady; yet you will not receive the attention
of your father because of your connection with Me, which is a source of great torment to
him.(20) He whose heart is burning (with jealousy) and who feels troubled in mind at the sight
of the glories of those exalted souls who stand as a witness to the mind of a Jiva (embodied

soul), is unable easily to ascend the supreme heights reached by them and merely hates
them even as the demons hate Sri Hari. (21)

प्रत्युद्ममप्रश्रयणाभिवादनं विधीयते साधु मिथ: सुमध्यमे ।
me: परस्मै पुरुषाय चेतसा गुहाशायायैव न देहमानिने ।२२॥
wa च तस्मिन् भगवान् वासुदेवो ह्यधोक्षजो मे नमसा विधीयते 1231
aa निरीक्ष्यो न पितापि dene cat on fee तदनुव्रताश्च a
यो विश्वसृग्यज्ञगतं वरोरु मामनागसं दुर्वचसाकरोत्तिर: 1261
यदि व्रजिष्यस्यतिहाय मद्वचो we wae न ततो भविष्यति ।
सम्भावितस्य स्वजनात्पराभवो यदा स सद्यो मरणाय कल्पते 1241
As regards exchange of formalities in the shape of rising from one's seat and advancing
to meet a friend, respectful behaviour and salutation etc., O slender-waisted lady, it is
properly done only by the wise, who do all this mentally with respect to the Supreme Person
dwelling in every heart, and not to him who regards the body as his own self. (22) It is the
absolutely pure mind which is termed as ‘Vasudeva’, because it is there that the Supreme

Person is realized in His unmasked glory. It is in (the shrine of) such a mind that | wait upon
with obeisance Lord Vasudeva, who is beyond sense-perception. (23) Therefore, you
