Dis. 9} ‘BOOK FOUR’ ` . arr
जो जीज्य व कौ क्तै डो ङ HORAK ATTA E SEE LEASE ELEANOR AEE HATTER ieee hee Ee eee

The Lord said: (I find that) Dhruva (son of king Uttanapada) has identified his self with
Me (the Soul of the universe); this accounts for the (sudden) stoppage of breath of all of you.
Hence be nct afraid and return each to your own adode; | shall (presently) deter the child from
his penance, which is (otherwise) hard to resist. (82)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, forming part of the Story of Dhruva,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
- otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Ot BP १६
Pee Si ees

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX

Dhruva returns home after receiving a boon from the Lord
मेत्रेय उवाच
त एवमुत्सन्नभया उरुक्रमे कृतावनामा: प्रययुस्रिविष्टपम् ।
सहस्रशीर्षापि ततो गरुत्मता मधोर्वनं भृत्यदिदृक्षया गत: । १ ।
a a fim योगविपाकतीव्रया हृत्पद्मकोश्रे ai तडित्प्रभम् ।
तिरोहितं सहसैवोपलक्ष्य बहि:स्थितं तदवस्थं ददर्शं । २ ।
तद्दर्शनेनागतसाध्वस: क्षिताववन्दताङ्गं विनमय्य दण्डवत् ।
Ta ome प्रपिबन्निवार्भकश्चुम्बन्निवास्येन भुजैरिवारिलिषन्। ३ ।
a तं faa aie सर्वस्य च हद्यवस्थित: ।
कृताञ्जलिं ब्रह्ममयेन कम्बुना wet oa कृपया कपोले । ४ ।
स चै तदॆव प्रतिपादितां गिरं दैवीं परिज्ञातपरात्मनिर्णय: ।
तं भक्तिभावोऽभ्यगृणादसत्वरं परिश्रुतोरुश्रवसं ध्रुवक्षिति: । ५ ।

Maitreya went on : Thus rid of their fear, the gods bent their heads low to the Lord (who
took very long strides during His descent as Vamana or the Divine Dwarf in orderto measure
the three paces of land granted to Him by the demon king Bali) and returned to heaven. The
Lord (who in His cosmic form appears with numberless heads) also thereupon flew on the
back of Garuda to Madhuvana with a longing to see His devotee (Dhruva). (1) Dhruva saw
that the form, brilliant as a flash of lightning, that was revealed in the lotus of his heart by an
intellect sharpened by the ripeness of Yoga (concentration) had suddenly vanished, and (on
opening his eyes) he beheld the same figure standing without. (2) Struck with awe at His
sight, the child (Dhruva) greeted Him by prostrating his body like a log on the ground. He
gazed at Him as if he would drink Him with his eyes, kiss Him with his lips and clasp Him
with his arms. (3) Sri Hari, who is enthroned in the heart of all and was (equally) present in
that of Dhruva too, (readily) perceived that the child was eager to extol Him but knew not how
to do it and stood (before Him) with joined palms. Hence He graciously touched his cheek
with His conch, which is no other than Veda (appearing in a concrete form). (4) Instantly
blessed with divine speech conferred (on him by the Lord) and having realized the truth of

the individual soul as well as of the Supreme Spirit, Dhruva, who was destined to have an
eternal abode (in the shape of the pole-star) calmly and devoutly proceeded to glorify the
