142 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

WHINE RS ata fre tre ren eee eee ee eee PETE eS HSS et CHA ARTH AAA AAAS ASSESS

on them, with Lord Visnu (the Wielder of the discus Sudargana) mounted on his back. (24)
वसुदेवस्य देवक्यां जातो भोजेन्द्रबन्धने। चिकीर्षुर्भगवानस्या: शमजेनाभियाचित: 1241
adi नन्दव्रजमित: पित्रा कंसाद्दिबिभ्यता । एकादश समास्तत्र गूढार्चि: सबलोऽवसत् 126!
परीतो वत्सपैर्वत्सांश्चारयन् व्यहरद्विभु: । यमुनोपवने कूजदद्विजसंकुलिताङ्घ्रिपे । २७॥
कौमारीं दर्शयंश्चेष्टां प्रेक्षणीयां व्रजौकसाम् । रुदन्निव हसन्मुग्धबालसिंहावलोकन: । २८।
स wa गोधनं cea निकेतं सितगोवृषम्। चारयन्ननुगान् गोपान् रणद्देणुररीरमत् । २९1
प्रयुक्तान् भोजराजेन मायिन: कामरूपिण: | लीलया व्यनुदत्तांस्तान् बाल: क्रीडनकानिव । ३०1
fam विषपानेन निगृह्य भुजगाधिषम्। उत्थाप्यापाययद्गावस्तत्तोयं प्रकृतिस्थितम् । ३१॥
अयाजयद्गोसवेन गोपराजं द्विजोत्तमै: | वित्तस्य चोरुभारस्य चिकीर्षन् सद्वययं विभु: 122
aude aa: कोपाद्भग्नमानेऽतिविह्वल: । गोत्रलीलातपत्रेण त्रातो भद्रानुगृह्णता 1231
शरच्छशिकरैर्मृष्टं मानयन् Gergen may कलपदं रेमे स्रीणां मण्डलमण्डन: ।३४॥

In order to bring relief to this earth the Lord was born of Vasudeva and Devaki in the
prison-house of Karnsa (the chief of the Bhojas) in response to the prayer of Brahma (the
unborn). (25) Having been removed therefrom to Nanda's Vraja by His father (Vasudeva),
who was terribly afraid of Karnsa, He lived there with Balarama (His elder brother) for eleven
years, concealing His glory (from the outside world). (26) In the grove on the bank of the
Yamuna, the trees of which were swarmed with warbling birds, the Lord sported in the midst
of cowherd boys, grazing calves. (27) He showed childish gestures that were pleasing to the
sight of the inhabitants of Vraja, sometimes seeming to weep, sometimes appearing to laugh
and sometimes gazing innocently like a lion-cub. (28) (As He grew a little older) the same
Lord took to grazing white bulls and cows, that were embodiments of splendour, and
entertained with the music of His flute the cowherd boys that accompanied Him. (29)
Meanwhile He despatched in mere sportall those demons sent by Karhsa—who were skilled
in Maya (conjuring tricks) and could assume any form they liked—even as a child would
smash up its playthings. (30) Having tamed (and expelled) Kaliya (aleader of serpents), He
revived the cows (as well as the cowherds) that had fallen dead by drinking the poisoned
water (of the Yamuna), and rendered it possible for them to drink its water,which had now
regainedits purity. (31) In orderto make the bestuse of the abundant richesin the possession
of Nanda (as also to curb the pride of Indra) the Lord persuaded him to perform with the help
of the best of Brahmanas a sacrifice in which cows are worshipped. (32) Blessed Vidura !
when Indra, who was enraged at the interruption of his worship, poured down torrential rains
(on the land of Vraja), the Lord protected the inmates of Vraja, that were much agitated, by
holding up the Govardhana hill like a toy-umbrella over them and thus showed His grace to
them. (33) Making the most of the evenings bright with-the rays of the autumnal moon, He
sang in melodious strains and revelledin the midst of a bevy of young women, gracing them
by His presence. (34) -

Thus ends the second discourse in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

ए १४ Teh:
DOD SEE EOD OD
