76 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

HOH HCHATER SALE AHH TERA ATEKE LECH ELSE RA OHSS SEER REPS HSER ASTER ETERESTHE HETH REDE NOHO

hermitage with her effulgence. The king instantly fell in love with her and spoke to her. (8-9)
Greatly rejoiced at her sight and sore stricken with love, he questioned her in soft words (as
follows), gracefully smiling, his fatigue having completely disappeared:—(10) "Who are you
with eyes resembling the petals of a lotus ? Whose daughter are you, O charming one ? And
what is the purpose of your staying in this lovely forest? (11) | clearly perceive you to be the
daughter of a Ksatriya, 0 pretty one! For, nowhere does the mind of the scions of Puru find
delight in (leans towards) unrighteousness.” (12)

- agra
विश्वामित्रात्मजैवाहं wet मेनकया at वेदैतद् भगवान् कण्वो वीर किं करवाम ते 1231
आस्यतां ह्यरविन्दाक्ष गृह्यतामर्हणं च न:। भुज्यतां सन्ति नीवारा उष्यतां यदि रोचते । १४॥

Sakuntala replied : Certainly | am the daughter of Vigwamitra, forsaken by Menaka in
the forest. The worshipful sage Kanva knows this (life-history of mine). What may we do for
you, 0 hero? (13) Have your seat, 0 lotus-eyed one, and indeed let our hospitality be
accepted (by you). There is (enough of} wild rice, which may (kindly) be partaken of; (and)
stay (here) if it pleases you. (14)

दुष्यत्त उवाच

उपपन्नमिदं सुभ्रु जाताया: कुशिकान्वये । we fe वृणते राज्ञां कन्यका: सदृशं वरम् ।१५॥
ओमित्युक्ते यथाधर्ममुपयेमे ङाकुन्तलाम्।गान्धर्वविधिना राजा देशकालविधानवित् । १६1
अमोघवीर्यो राजर्षिर्महिष्यां वीर्यमादधे । श्वोभूते स्वपुरं यात: कालेनासूत सा सुतम् । १७॥
कण्व: कुमारस्य वने चक्रे समुचिता: क्रिया: । बद्ध्वा मृगेन्दरांस्तरसा क्रीडति स्म स बालक: 1१८॥

Dusyanta replied : What you say is (quite) becoming of you, born (as you are) in the line
of Kugika, 0 beautiful one! For, princesses choose a suitable partner by themselves. (15)
The king, who knew what was enjoined ata particular time and place, married, consistently
with the ethical code, Sakuntala—who had (tacitly) expressed her consent—according to
the Gandharva system (which is based on mutual consent alone). (16) The royal sage, who
was possessed of unfailing procreative energy, deposited his seed (at night) in the womb of
his wedded wife (Sakuntala). The next morning he went (back) to his capital. (And) in course
of time she gave birth toason. (17) The sage Kanva performed the appropriate (purificatory)
rites relating to the (new-born) prince (commencing from Jatakarma, the rite performed at
the time of the birth of a child), in the forest. While (yet) an infant, he used to play with lions,
binding them with his superior strength. (18)
4 दुर्त्ययविक्रान्तमादाय प्रमदोत्तमा । हरेरंशांशसम्भूतं भर्तुरन्तिकमागमत् 1831
चदा न we राजा भार्यापुत्रावनिन्दितौ avast सर्वभूतानां खे वागाहाशरीरिणी 120!
माता sen fig: पुत्रो येन जात: स एव स: । भरस्व पुत्रं दुष्यन्त मावमंस्था: शाकुन्तलाम् ।२१॥
Yin: wt नयति नरदेव यमक्षयात्।त्वं चास्य धाता गर्भस्य सत्यमाह शकुन्तला । २२
Sakuntala (the jewel among young women) sought the presence of her (royal) husband
(Emperor Dusyanta), taking alongwith her that boy of formidable prowess, born with a
minute ray (of the divine essence) of Sri Hari. (19) When the king (Dusyanta) did not accept
(as his own) Sakuntala (his wife) and her son, who were (both) irreproachable, an ethereal
voice in the heavens spoke (as follows), all living beings listening:—(20) “Mother is but a
leathern bag (to hold and develop the seed). The son belongs to his father (alone); nay, he
is the same as his father” (of whom he was born). (Therefore,) O Dusyanta! havet your son

* This is corroborated by the Sruti, which says:— आत्मा वै पुत्रनामासि`
+The command of the ethereal voice asking Dusyanta to accept the child (भरस्व) was responsible for the child being given
the name of Bharata.
