286 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 44

२७ वित् व व विसि nein iit nn re rr Ee ee ee य २ ।

mighty, of such description, by both of whom the elephant (Kuvalayapida), that possessed
the strength of a thousand elephants, was disposed of in (mere) sport. (39) Therefore, you
both should (unhesitatingly) contend with powertul rivals; there will be no unrighteousness
involved in your doing so. Show your prowess against me, O scion of Vrsni, and let Mustika
try his strength with Bala. (40)

Thus ends the forty-ihird discourse entitled “The elephant Kuvalayapida killed (by Sri Krsna),"
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavaia-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

न्न्
PIES Sires

अथ चतुश्चत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLIV
Karhsa slain (by the Lord)

श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं चर्चितसङ्कल्पो भगवान् मधुसूदन: | आससादाथ चाणूरं मुष्टिकं रोहिणीसुत: । १ ।
हस्ताभ्यां हस्तयोर्बद्ध्वा पद्भ्यामेव च पाद्यो: । विचकर्षतुरन्योन्यं प्रसह्य विजिगीषया । २ ।
अरत्नी 2 अरत्निभ्यां जानुभ्याँ चैव जानुनी । शिर: ज्ञीष्णोरसोरस्तावन्योन्यमभिजघ्नतु: | ३ ।
परिभ्रामणविक्षेपपरिरम्भावपातनै: । उत्सर्पणापसर्पणैश्चान्योन्यं प्रत्यरुन्धताम् । ४ ।
उत्थापनैरुन्नयनैश्चालनै: स्थापनैरपि | परस्परं जिगीषन्तावपचक्रतुरात्मन: । ५ ।

Sri Suka began again : Challenged thus, Lord Madhustidana of unflinching resolution
immediately closed with Cantra, and Balarama (son of Rohini) with Mustika. (1) Interlacing
their hands with the hands and their feet with the feet of their rival, Sri Krsna and Canara (and
even so Balarama and Mustika) tugged at one another vehemently with intent to overthrow
their opponent. (2) They struck with their elbows the two elbows, with their knees the knees,
with their head the head and with their chest the chest of each other. (3) They tried to frustrate
each other by revolving, pushing, squeezing in their arms, throwing down, and slipping to the
front or to the rear of their opponent. (4) Eager to score a victory over each other, they hurt the
body of their adversary by lifting up, carrying, throwing back and even fixing him to a spot. (5)

तद् बलाबलवद्युद्धुं समेता: सर्वयोषित: । ऊचु: परस्परं राजन् सानुकम्पा SRT । ६ ।
महानय बताधर्मं wat राजसभासदाम्। a बलाबलवद्युद्धं राज्ञोऽन्विच्छन्ति पर्यत: । ७ |
क्व वज्रसारसर्वाङ्मौ मल्लौ हौलेन्द्रसन्निभौ । कक चातिसुकुमाराङ्गो किञ्चोरौ नाप्तयोवनो । ८ ।
धर्मव्यतिक्रमो ga wana ध्रुवं भवेत्। यत्राधर्म: समुत्तिष्ठेन्न स्थेयं तत्र कर्हिचित् । ९ ।
न सभां प्रविशेत् we: सभ्यदोषाननुस्मरन्। अब्रुवन् विब्रुवन्नज्ञो नर: किल्बिषमश्नुते igo!
बल्गत: ज्ञह्रुपभित: कृष्णस्य वदनाम्बुजम् । वीक्ष्यतां श्रमवार्युप्तं पद्मकोशमिवाम्बुभि: ।११॥
fe न wad रामस्य मुखमात्ताम्रलोचनम्। ga प्रति aed हाससंरम्भशोभितम् ।१२॥
पुण्या बत व्रजभुवो यदयं नृलिङ्गगूढ: पुराणपुरुषो वनचित्रमाल्य: |
