526 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

Wee REM, ewe We We We Cre HRB BE Ne BO ee WT A OE OE EE OT EE ET EH HT NT SE A

distance of) thirty-four lakh and eight hundred Yojanas (or two crore, seventy-two lakh, six
thousand and four hundred miles) in the course of two Ghatikas (forty-eight minutes), the
chariot of the sun-god, which represents the three Vedas (Rgveda, Samaveda and
Yajurveda), continues to travel through the four cities (one after another in the order
mentioned above). (12)
यस्यैकं चक्रं द्वादशारं षण्नेमि त्रिणाभि संवत्सरात्मकं समामनन्ति तस्याक्षो मेरोर्मूर्धनि Har
मानसोत्तरे कृतेतरभागो aa प्रोतं रविरथचक्रं तैलयन्त्रचक्रवद् भ्रमन्मानसोत्तरगिरौ परिभ्रमति। १३॥
`तस्मिन्नक्षे agen द्वितीयोऽक्षस्तुर्यमानेन सम्मितस्तैलयन्त्राक्षवद् ध्रुवे कृतोपरिभाग:। १४॥

The wise speak of this chariot as having one of its wheels in the shape of a year with
twelve spokes (in the form of the twelve months), a rim with six segments (in the form of the
six seasons) and a hub with three pieces joined together (in the shape of the three parts of
four months each). Its axle-tree is fixed (at one end) to the top of Mount Meru and has its other
end placed (somewhere in the air) over (the belt of) the Manasottara (on the same level as
the Meru). Fixed through and rotating on this like the wheel of an oil-press, the wheel of the
chariot of the sun-god revolves over (the entire length of) the Manasottara Mountain. (13)
(Besides this) there is a second axle-tree, measuring one fourth of the length of the first, (i.e.,
thirty-nine lakh, thirty-seven thousand and five hundred Yojanas, the length of the first being
one crore, fifty-seven lakh and fifty thousand Yojanas as already pointed out), with its lower
end joined to the aforesaid (first) axle, like the axle of an oil-press, andits upper end fastened
to the pole-star (with an aerial cord). (14)

सप्तारुणयोजिता वहन्ति देवमादित्यम्। १५॥ पुरस्तात्सवितुररुण: ware नियुक्त: diet कर्मणि
किलास्ते | १६ । तथा वालखिल्या ऋषयोऽङ्गुष्ठपर्वमात्रा: षष्टिसहस्राणि पुरत: सूर्यं सूक्तवाकाय नियुक्ता:
संस्तुवन्ति। १७ | तथान्ये च ॠषयो गन्धर्वाप्सरसो नागा ग्रामण्यो यातुधाना देवा इत्येकेकशो TUT: ATT
चतुर्दश मासि मासि भगवन्तं सूर्यमात्मानं नानानामानं पृथङ्नानानामान: पृथक्कर्मभिर्द्वन्द्वश उपासते | १८ ।

mart सार्धनवकोटियोजनपरिमण्डलं भूवलयस्य क्षणेन सगव्यूत्युत्तरं द्विसहस्त्रयोजनानि a
भुङ्के। १९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे ज्योतिश्चक्रसूर्यरथमण्डलवर्णनं नामॆकविंशोऽध्याय:। २१ I

The interior of the chariot is thirty-six lakh Yojanas (or two crore and eighty-eight lakh
miles) long and a quarter of it (or nine lakh Yojanas) in breadth. The yoke of the chariot of
the sun-god is (also) of the same extent (nine lakh Yojanas long) : joined to this by Aruna
(the charioteer), seven horses, severally bearing the names of the (seven Vedic) metres
(Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Tristubh, Anustubh and Pankti), carry the sun-god (seated in
the chariot). (15) Charged with the role of a charioteer, they say, sits Arunain front of the sun-
god but with his face turned towards the west (towards the sun-god in order to avoid showing
disrespect to him by turning his back towards him). (16) Even so, entrusted with (the duty
of) uttering his praises (and ever seated) in front of him, sixty thousand sages, (known as)
the Valakhilyas, (all) equal in size to the forepart of a thumb, extol the sun-god in a chorus. (17)
Similarly other Rsis (sages), Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Apsaras (celestial nymphs),
Nagas (serpent-demons), Yaksas (a species of demigods), Yatudhanas (Raksasas) and
gods—fourteen (in all) taken singly and forming seven groups when taken in pairs (each pair
consisting of two individuals of the same species), and bearing diverse names—wait upon the
Lord, the (universal) Spirit, in the form of the sun-god, called by different names, through
different services* andin distinct batches (of fourteen) every month. (18) (Ithas already been
