Dis. 22] BOOK EIGHT । ॥ ॥ 827
SESPERAELE REHASH SHRP R EW CRE EEE Sree tert tere enn niniiertienrrnrrnenie
श्रीगुक उवाच
तस्यानुशृण्वतो राजन् प्रह्रादस्य कृताञ्जले: । हिरण्यगर्भो भगवानुवाच मधुसूदनम् । १८॥
ag वीक्ष्य पतिं साध्वी तत्पत्नी भयविह्वला । प्राञ्जलि: sodas बभाषेक्काङ्मुखी नृप ।१९॥

ङ Suka went on : Within the hearing, O king, of the aforesaid Prahrada, who stood with
joined palms, the glorious Brahma (who had at the beginning of creation emerged from.a
golden egg) proceeded to speak to Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu). (18) (But
before he opened his lips) the virtuous wife of Bali (Vindhyavali by name), who was

overwhelmed with fear to see her husband bound, submitted (as follows) to Lord Vamana
(the youngest Brother of Indra), with joined palms and a drooping face, bending low in

supplication. (19)
विन्ध्यावलिरुवाच
क्रौडार्थमात्पनइदंब्रिक्तात्कांतेस्वार्म्यतुतत्रकुधियोऽपरईज्ञकुर्यु:।
कर्तु: प्रभोस्तव किमस्यत आवहन्ति त्यक्तह्रियस्त्वदवरोपितकर्तृवादा: । २०।

Vindhyavali prayed : This universe consisting of three spheres (heaven, earth and the
intermediate region) has been created by You for the purpose of Your diversion. Over such
a universe (which is Your plaything), however, others (like Bali) of perverse understanding,
who have cast (all) shame to the winds and in whom the notion of their being free agents
has been planted by You (through Your Maya), recognize their proprietorship (right to
alienate it), O Lord ! (But, as a matter of fact, when there is nothing which they can rightfully
call their own), what can they offer (as a gift) to You, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer

(of the universe)? (20)
ब्रह्मोवाच

भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेव जगन्मय । मुञ्चैनं हतसर्वस्वं नायमर्हति निग्रहम् । २१।
कृत्स्ना तेऽनेन दत्ता भूर्लोका: कर्मार्जिताश्च ये । निवेदितं च सर्वस्वमात्माविक्वया धिया 1221
यत्पादयोरशठधी: सलिलं प्रदाय दूर्वाङ्कुरैरपि विधाय सतीं सपर्याम् ।
अप्युत्तमां गतिमसौ भजते त्रिलोकीं दाश्वानविक्लवमना: कथमार्तिमृच्छेत् । २३॥

Brahma submitted : 0 Creator of living beings, 0 Inner Controller (and Protector) of
(those) created beings, O god (even) of gods, O Cosmic Being, (pray,) release this demon,
who has been stripped of everything; (as such) he no longer deserves punishment (in the
form of bondage). (21) The entire globe has been gifted by him to You, as well as the worlds
(heaven and the aerial region) that were acquired (by him) in virtue of his (meritorious)
actions. (Further) all that he owned, nay, his (very) self (body) has been offered to You with
an unflinching mind.(22) Having given away with an unwincing mind (all) the three worlds to
You—by pouring (mere) water at whose feet with a guileless intellect and offering harmless
worship even with sprouts of panic grass one can attain even the highest goal (final beatitude
or residence in Your divine realm)—how can he reap affliction? (23)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
wer यमनुगृह्णामि तद्विशो विधुनोम्यहम् । यन्मद: gee: स्तब्धो लोकं मां चावमन्यते । २४॥
यदा कदाचिज्जीवात्मा संसरन् निजकर्मभि: | नानायोनिघ्ननीशोऽयं पौरुषीं गतिमाव्रजेत् ।२५॥
जन्मकर्मवयोरूपविद्यैश्चर्यधनादिभि: । यद्यस्य न भवेत् स्तम्भस्तत्रायं मदनुग्रह: 1261
मानस्तम्भनिमित्तानां जन्मादीनां समन्तत: । सर्वश्रेय:प्रतीपानां हन्त मुह्येन्न मत्पर: 12091
एष दानवदॆत्यानामग्रणी: कोर्तिवर्धन: | अजैषीदजयां मायां सीदन्नपि न मुह्यति ici

