Dis. 22 ] BOOK TEN 199

त्क Rah WE SP ERE EE Se ET TE EO eR eS ETT EEE TERETE ID HA HH HHH BY

the highly delightful notes, consisting of low and sweet tones, of the flutes of the two
Brothers—leading the cows from one forest to another in the company of (other) cowherd
boys and distinguished by a string for tying the hind legs of cows while milking them (which
they had twined round their heads) anda cord for pulling unruly cows (which they had placed
across their shoulder)—there should ensue among the embodied beings, O friends,
(complete) lack of movement in those capable of locomotion (including running streams),
anda thrill of joy should appear in (the stationary) trees ! (19) Recounting to one another such
pastimes that pertained to the Lord, who moved about in Vrndavana, the Gopis became
mentally absorbed in those pastimes (themselves). (20)

Thus ends ihe twentyfirst discourse entitled "A Song inspired by the (Lord's) Flute,”
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

cStntE St:
PIPE ESE LID

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIl

The Lord steals away the garments of cowherd maids

हेमन्ते प्रथमे मासि नन्दव्रजकुमारिका: । चेरुर्हविष्यं भुञ्जाना: कात्यायन्यर्चनव्रतम्। १ ।
अम्याहुत्यम्भिसिकाक्खिग्जलान्तेचोदिप्तेऽरुणे!वृत्स्वग्प्नतिकृतिंदेत्नींपानर्बुर्नृपसैक्लीम्।र।

व भिभिर्बलिभिर्धूपढीपकै: | दे के: । ३ ।
कात्यायनि महामाये महायोगिन्यधीश्वरि। नन्दगोपसुतं देवि पतिं मे कुरु ते नम: ।
इति मन्त्रं जपन्त्यस्ता: पूजां चक्रु: कुमारिका: । ४ ।
एवं मासं wd चेरु: Had: कृष्णचेतस:। भद्रकालीं समानरचुर्भूयान्नन्दसुत: पति: । ५ I
Sri Suka began again : In the first month (Margasirsa) of the Hemanta season
(consisting of the months of Margasirsa and Pausa) the maids of Vraja, ruled over by Nanda,
observed a vow of worshipping Goddess Katyayani, subsisting on only such food as is fit to
be offered to the sacrificial fire. (1) Having taken a dip in the waters of the Kalindi (Yamuna)
at daybreak and making an image of sand on the river bank, they worshipped the Goddess
(in that image), O protector of men, with sandal-paste etc., fragrant flowers, propitiatory
oblations (such as cocoanut), incense and lights, other offerings (suchas articles of wearing
apparel, ornaments etc.), high and low, as well as with tender leaves, fruits and (unbroken)
grains of rice. (2-3) The aforesaid virgins performed worship, each muttering the following
prayer—’ Goddess Katyayani, the great deluding potency (of the Lord), possessed of infinite
Yogic powers, O supreme Ruler (of the universe ina female form), (pray) make Sri Krsna (the
Darling of Nanda, the cowherd chief) my husband ! Hail to You !" (4) With their mind (and
heart) set on Sri Krsna the maidens thus observed the (sacred) vow fora (whole) month and
worshipped Goddess Bhadrakali with due ceremony praying: *Let the Darling of Nanda be
