Dis. 14] BOOK THREE 195

SORES ae SRA RE SESW BRET ET Be ETRE Ber Se Sd Se Bride freddie fr de Pri iets rite oh freien tert
SEER ES SHENAE TET OCONEE ETHER OEHHA RRO न्वि व eo Pho eb hhh hhheh Rene hehehehehe
~ त . fat ~~
तस्य चोद्धरत: क्षोणीं स्वदंष्टाग्रेण लोलया | दॆत्यराजस्य च AA, कस्माद्धेतोरभून्मृध: । ३ ।

Vidura said : We have just heard from you, 0 crest-jewel of sages, how Hiranyaksa, the
earliest of the Daityas (sons of Diti), was slain by Sri Hari, who had taken the form of a boar
(representing all sacrifices). (2) As He was playfully engaged in lifting up the earth out of
water on the ends of His tusks, how did He come to have an encounter with that demon king,
O holy sage? (3)

मैत्रेय उवाच

ay at त्वया पृष्टमवतारकथां हरे: । यत्त्वं पृच्छसि मर्त्यनां मृत्युपाशविज्ञातनीम् । ४ ।
ययोत्तानपद: पुत्रो मुनिना गीतयार्भक: | मृत्यो: कृत्वैव मूर्ध्यङ्ध्रिमारुरोह हरे: पदम् । ५ ।
अथात्रापीतिहासोऽयं yt मे वर्णित: पुरा। ब्रह्मणा देवदेवेन देवानामनुपृच्छताम् । ६ |
दितिर्दाक्षायणी क्षत्तर्मारीचं कर्यपं पतिम्। अपत्यकामा चकमे सन्ध्यायां हृच्छयार्दिता । ७ |
इष्टाग्निजिह्वे पयसा पुरुषं यजुषां पतिम् Prateek आसीनमग्न्यगारे समाहितम् । ८ |
Maitreya replied : You have asked a good question, O valiant Vidura, inasmuch as your
enquiry relates to the story of Sri Hari's descent (as the divine Boar), which cuts asunder the
noose of (birth and) death in the case of mortals. (4) It was through the story of Sri Hari,
narrated by the sage Narada, that Dhruva (the son of king Uttanapada), even as a child, set
his foot on the head* of Death and ascended to the abode of Sri Hari. (5) Now in this
connection | have heard the following anecdote, which was told of yore by Brahma, the god
of gods, in response to a query by the gods. (6) Once Diti, a daughter of Daksa, who was
eager to obtain a son, sought the company of her husband, Kasyapa, son of Marici, while
it was only dusk, stung as she was by (the darts of) love, O Vidura. (7) Having just finished
offering oblations of rice boiled in milk to the Supreme Person, the lord of sacrifices, who has
the flames of fire for His tongues, the Sage sat absorbed in deep meditation in the shrine of
fire, knowing that the sun was about to set. (8)

दितिरुवाच

एषपांत्वस्कृतेविद्व्रन्कामआक्तारासन:।दुनोत्निदोनांविक्रप्यरम्पामिवमतङ्गज:।९।

तद्भवान्दह्यमानायां सपत्नीनां समृद्धिभि: । प्रजावतीनां we ते मय्यायुङ्क्तामनुग्रहम् । १०॥

भर्तर्याप्तोरुमानानां लोकानाविशाते यश: । पतिर्भवद्दिधो यासां प्रजया ननु जायते ।११॥

qa पिता नो भगवान्दक्षो टुहितृबत्सल:।कंवृणीतबरंवत्साइत्यपृच्छतन:पृथकू।१२।

स विदित्वाऽऽत्मजानां नो भावं सन्तानभावन: । त्रयोदशाददात्तासां यास्ते शीलमनुव्रता: 1231

अथ मे कुरु कल्याण कामं कञ्जविलोचन | आर्तोपसर्पणं yar हि महीयसि ।१४॥
Diti said : 0 sage, just as a wild elephant crushes a banana tree, this god of love, bow in
hand, displays his valouragainst me, a helpless woman, andis tormenting me on your account.
(9) Therefore, God bless you, show your grace to me, burning as | am (with jealousy) to see

the happiness and prosperity of my co-wives, who are already blessed with children. (10) Those
wives alone are held in great esteem by their husband and enjoy world-wide fame, whose

* Itis mentioned in Book IV that when the attendants of Lord Visnu, Sunanda and others, brought an aerial car to pick
up Dhruva and escort him to the Lord's divine Abode, Mrtyu (the god of death) also appeared on the scene, thinking that his
Services might be required before the soul af Dhruva couldbe translated to the divine Abode. Dhruva, however, in utterdefiance
of the gad of death, refused to cast off his body (which was supremely dear to him because it had been blessed by the Lord
with His divine touch) and, actually setting his foot on the head of Death as onthe rung of aladder, boarded the car and bodily
ascended to the divine Abode.
