Dis. 16 ] BOOK EIGHT 801

PRR EIA ER PEA EERE RATE TE HAUTE SHE LH KOH EEL AHH ET HKSATEATHAHKACHKEKHHOK OHA H THERA

SR उवाच
एवमभ्यर्थितोऽदित्या कस्तामाह Walaa अहो मायाबलं विष्णो: स्नेहबद्धमिदं जगत् । १८॥
क्व देहो भोतिकोऽनात्मा क्व चात्मा प्रकृते: पर: | कस्य के पतिपुत्राद्या मोह wa हि कारणम् । १९॥
उपतिष्ठस्व पुरुषं भगवन्तं जनार्दनम्। सर्वभूतगुहावासं वासुदेवं जगद्गुरुम् ।२०॥
a विधास्यति ते कामान् हरिर्दीनानुकम्पन:। अमोघा भगवद्भक्तिर्नेतरेति मतिर्मम । २१।

Sri Suka-continued: Thus entreated by Aditi, the sage Kasyapa said to her as though
smiling, "Wonderful is the might of the delusive potency of Lord Visnu, due to which this
animate creation is bound by (ties of) affection ! (18) How widely divergent are the material
body, which is other than the Spirit, and the Spirit, which lies beyond (the realm of) Prakrti
(Matter)! Who and whose are the husband, son and others? Ignorance alone is the root of
(one's) attachment to them. (19) (Therefore,) worship Lord Vasudeva (the all-pervading
Visnu), the supreme Person, solicited by (all) the people, and dwelling in the heart of all
created beings, the Preceptor of the universe. (20) The selfsame Lord Sri Hari, who.
compassionates the miserable, will fulfil your desires. Devotion to the Lord (alone) is unfailirig
in its results, but not so devotion to others: such is my conviction."(21)

अदितिरुवाच
केनाहं विधिना ब्रह्मन्नुपस्थास्ये जगत्पतिम्। यथा मे सत्यसङ्कल्पो विदध्यात् स मनोरथम् । २२।
afer त्वं द्विजश्रेष्ठ विधिं तदुपधावनम्। amg तुष्यति मे देव: सीदन्त्या: सह Gah: 1231
Aditi submitted: By what method, O holy Brahmana, shall | wait upon-the Ruler of the
universe, so that the said Lord of true resolve may accomplish my object ? (22) (Pray,) tell
me, O chief of the Brahmanas, the method of propitiating Him, whereby the Lord may be
quickly pleased with me, suffering as | am with my darlings. (23)
करयप उवाच
एतन्मे भगवान्पृष्ट: प्रजाकामस्य पद्मज:। यदाह A प्रवक्ष्यामि ad केशवतोषणम् esi
फाल्गुनस्यामले पक्षे gee पयोव्रत: | अर्चयेदरविन्दाक्षॆ wae परमयान्वित: 1241
सिनीवाल्यां मृदाऽऽलिप्य स्नायात् क्रोडविदीर्णवा । यदि लभ्येत वै स्रोतस्येतं मन्त्रमुदीरयेत् । २६॥
त्वं देव्यादिवराहेण रसाया: स्थानमिच्छता । उद्धृतासि नमस्तुभ्यं पाप्मानं मे sone 1291
निर्वर्तितात्मनियमो देवमर्चेत् समाहित: | अर्चायां स्थण्डिले सूर्ये जले वह्नौ गुरावपि । २८।
The sage Kasyapa replied: | shall (presently) speak to you about the following sacred
vow, intended to propitiate Lord Kesava (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), of which
the worshipful Brahma (the lotus-born) told me when questioned by me,desirous of
progeny.(24) Full of supreme devotion and subsisting on milk (alone), one should worship
Lord Visnu (of lotus eyes) for twelve days during the bright fortnight of (the month of)
Phalguna. (25) Besmearing his body with the earth turned by a boar, if actually available,
on the Amavasya (the last day of the dark fortnight), the devotee should, while standing in
the middle of a stream, recite the following prayer: "O goddess ! you were lifted up from the
bottom of the deluge water by (the Lord appearing in the form of) the very first Boar, who
soughta footing (for living beings). Hail to You ! (Pray,) wipe out (all) my sin!" and then-bathe
(inthat stream).(26-27) Having finished his (daily) routine (of duties both of the obligatory and
occasional types), he should worship the Lord with a concentrated mind in an image, altar,
the sun, water, fire or even his preceptor (invoking Him by reciting the following prayer): (28)

Tp भगवते पुरुषाय महीयसे। सर्वभूतनिवासाय वासुदेवाय साक्षिणे ।२९॥
