458 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 81

AAA ORA OMAR EKE TROT गासा क RAAT ORO 88 ल् ग त् # ता 9४ REN RH KERNS HHH HEHEHE EH

entire universe, the very embodiment of Self-enjoyment, Bhagavan Sri Krsna followed him
to some distance, delighted him by sweet and polite words and bowed to him.(13) Even
though the Brahmana did not receive any fortune from the Lord directly, he did not ask for
anything himself. He felt ashamed of the meanness of his heart. He, however, felt supremely
happy for having obtained the blessed sight of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (14) He said to himself,
“Oh (wonder of wonders) | have seen today with my own eyes, Bhagavan Sri Krsna’s love
for a Brahmana. He is really a devotee of the Brahmanas. He clasped to His bosom, which
is the abode of the Goddess of Wealth, a destitute like myself! (15) What affinity is there
between me, avile sinner and destitue (onthe one hand), and SriKrsna, the abode of Laksmi
(on the other). Only because | am born of Brahmana parents, He folded me in his arms. (16)
Not only that, like His own brother, He made me sit on the bed of His beloved consort Rukmini,
and finding me fatigued, Queen Rukmini fanned me with a chowry in Her hand. (17) The God
of gods, who treats the Brahmanaas His deity, shampooed my feet and rendered every other
form of personal service to me and treated me with the respect due to a god! (18) Heavenly
bliss, salvation,riches of this world or of the nether world, and all supernatural powers follow
from the worship of His feet. (19) And yet He did not give me even a little wealth. Because
He thought, poor as | was, wealth would completely turn my head and make me forget Him.
Oh, how merciful is the Lord to me. (He has really done me an act of grace by withholding
wealth from me).” (20)

तच्चिन्तयन्नन्त: प्राप्तो निजगृहान्तिकम्। सूर्यानलेन्दुसङ्कारैर्विमानै: सर्वतो वृतम् ।२१॥
विचित्रोपवनोद्यानै: कूजदद्विजकुलाकुलै: | प्रोत्फुल्लकुमुदाम्भोजकह्लारोत्पलवारिभि: ।२२॥
जुष्टं स्वलङ्कृतै: पुम्भि: स्रीभिश्च हरिणाक्षिभि: | किमिदं कस्य वा स्थानं कथ्रं तदिदमित्यभूत् । २३॥
एवं मीमांसमानं तं नरा नार्योऽमरप्रभा: । प्रत्यगृह्णन महाभागं गीतवाद्येन भूयसा ex
पतिमागतमाकर्ण्य पल्नुद्धर्षातिसम्भ्रमा | निश्चक्राम गृहात्तूर्णं रूपिणी श्रीरिवालयात् । २५॥
पतिव्रता oft दृष्टा प्रेमोत्कण्ठाश्रुलोचना | मीलिताक्ष्यनमद बुद्ध्या मनसा परिषस्वजे 126)

Musing inwardly thus, the Brahmana arrived near his house. There he found the area
surrounded on all sides by seven-storeyed buildings resplendent as the sun, fire and the
moon. (21) It was interpersed with beautiful gardens and parks which resounded with the
warbling of birds of all descriptions, with ponds and pools in which various types of lilies and
lotuses were in full blossom. (22) Well-adorned men and pretty women were moving here
and there. The Brahmana stood puzzled at the sight. He said to himself, " What is this (Iam
seeing in front of me)? Whose place is this? (Is it the same place where | lived ? If so,) what
magic has transformed it into so many palaces?” (23) As he was engrossed in these
thoughts, men and women, possessing the splendour of gods advanced to receive the
blessed Brahmana singing and playing upon various musical instruments. (24) Hearing of
the return of her lord, the wife of the Brahmana was extremely delighted (at heart}, and in
joyous impatience, hurriedly came out of the palace. She looked like the veritable Goddess
Laksmi coming out of her abode. (25) At the sight of her husband her eyes became wet with
tears of love and excitement. Closing her eyes (out of shyness) she respectfully bowed to
him and mentally embraced him. (26)

val वीक्ष्य विस्फुरन्तीं देवीं वैमानिकीमिव । दासीनां निष्ककण्ठीनां मध्ये भान्तीं स विस्मित: 1291
प्रीत: स्वयं wa युक्त: प्रविष्टो निजमन्दिरम्। मणिस्तम्भशतोपेतॆ महेन्द्रभवनं यथा ।२८॥
पय:फेननिभा: wen दान्ता रुक्मपरिच्छदा: । पर्यङ्का हेमदण्डानि चामरव्यजनानि च ।२९॥
आसनानि च हैमानि मृदूपस्तरणानि च । मुक्तादामविलम्बीनि वितानानि द्युमन्ति च । ३०॥
