34 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

a मन्यसे waged fra मित्रं सुहत्तमम्। अकरो: सचिवं ad dregs सारथिम् । २०॥
सर्वात्ममर समदूशो ह्यद्दयस्यानहङ्कृते: । तत्कृतं मतिवैषम्यं निरवद्यस्य न क्वचित् ।२१।
तथाप्येकान्तभक्तेषु पर्य भूपानुकम्पितम् aise: साक्षात्कृष्णो दर्शनमागत: 1221
भक्त्याऽऽवरेश्य मनो यस्मिन् वाचा यन्नाम Alda । त्यजन् कलेवरं योगी मुच्यते कामकर्मभि: 1231
a देवदेवो भगवान् प्रतीक्षतां कलेवरं यावदिदं हिनोम्यहम् ।
प्रसन्नहासारुणलोचनोल्लसन्मुखाम्बुजो ध्यानपथश्चतुर्भुज: । २४।

"Sri Krsna is God Himself. He is no other than the Prime Person, Lord Narayana.
Deluding the world by His Maya, He lives incognito among the Vrsnis (a branch of the
Yadus). (18) No one else than Lord Siva, the celestial sage Narada and Lord Kapila Himself,
O Yudhisthira, know the most hidden glory of Sri Krsna, whom you think to be your cousin
(maternal uncle's son), beloved friend and greatest well-wisher and whom out of affection
you made your counsellor, envoy and charioteer ! (19-20) In Him,who is the Soul of the
universe, who looks upon all with the same eye, is one without a second and is free from
egotism and blemishless, there can be no sense of diversity in regard to these divergent
functions on any account. (21) Yét, O king, look at His compassion for those who are
exclusively devoted to Him, in that Sri Krsna has appeared in person before me at this hour,
when | am about to give up the ghost. (22) A Yogi (mystic) who casts off his body with his
thought fixed on Him through devotion and chanting His Name with his tongue is rid of all
hankerings and released from the bondage of actions. (23) May that Lord, who is adorable
even for gods and possessed of four arms, whose lotus-like countenance beams with
gracious smiles and reddish eyes and who appears to others only in their meditation stay
on here till | shuffle off this body." (24)

Ud उवाच
युधिष्ठिरस्तदाकर्ण्य शयानं TR | अपृच्छद्दिविधान्धर्मानृषीणां चानुश्रृण्वताम् । २५॥
पुरुषस्वभावविहितान् यथावर्णं यथाश्रमम्। वैराग्यरागोपाधिभ्यामाम्नातोभयलक्षणान् ।॥२६॥

दानधर्मान् राजधर्मान् मोक्षधर्मान् विभागशा: । atte, भगवद्धर्मान् समासव्यासयोगत: 1291
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षांश्च सहोपायान् यथा AAI नानाख्यानेतिहासेषु वर्णयामास तत्त्ववित् । २८॥
धर्मं प्रवदतस्तस्य स काल: प्रत्युपस्थित:। यो योगिन्छन्दमृत्योर्वाञ्छितस्तूत्तरायण: 12¢1
wade =f: सहस्रणीर्बिमुक्तसङ्गे मन आदिपूरुषे ।
कृष्णे लसत्पीतपटे चत्तुर्भुजे पुर:स्थितेऽमीलितदृग्व्यधारयत् ।३०॥
feet धारणया हताशुभस्तदीक्षयैवाशु गतायुधव्यथ: ।
निवृत्तसर्वेन्द्रियवृत्तिबिभ्रमस्तुष्टाव जन्यं विसृजञ्जनार्दनम् । ३१॥

SUta continued: Hearing this, Yudhisthira asked Bhisma even as he lay on his cage-
like bed of arrows questions concerning a variety of Dharmas (sacred obligations or courses
of conduct) in the presence of the Rsis. (25) Thereupon Bhisma, who had realized the Truth,
discoursed upon, one by one, the various Dharmas (duties) determined by the innate
disposition of men and apportioned with due regard to their Varna (social grade) and Agrama
(stage in life) and the twofold Dharmas (the Dharmas involving worldly activity—Pravrtti, and
those marked by withdrawal from such activity—Nivrtti) severally recommended for those
endowed with dispassion and those who are full of worldly attachment, the Dharmas relating
to charitable gifts, the duties obligatory on monarchs, the courses of conduct which are
conducive to liberation, the duties of women and the courses of conduct that are intended
