Dis. 5] BOOK SEVEN 671

LPAHKAHRAGHALEHKSEHEAEHHEREAARK HHI ET KH eee ERTS HEARS REI HERE MERAH

न तस्य चिन्त्यं तव नाथ चक्ष्महे न वै firqat गुणदोषयो: पदम्।४९।
इमं तु पातैर्वरुणस्य aca निधेहि sit न पलायते यथा ।
बुद्धिश्च पुंसो वयसाऽऽर्यसेवया यावद गुरुर्भार्गव आगमिष्यति । ५०॥

To him, who sat with his face downward, his splendour having been blasted to some
extent by his-anxious thought as aforementioned, Sanda and Amarka, the sons of the sage
Usana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of the demon race), as the tradition goes, spoke thus in
private:—(48) "You have conquered single-handed all the three worlds, whose guardians
are frightened by the (mere) play of your eyebrows. Such as you are, we see nothing for you
tobe anxious about, Olord ! Indeed the behaviour of children is no topic forjudgmentas good
or bad. (49) Until, however, your preceptor (and our father), Sukracarya (son of Bhrgu),
comes back, (please) keep the boy bound with the cords of Varuna (the god of water) so that
he may not abscond through fear. A man's reason returns with (advanced) age as well as
through the service of exalted souls." (50)

तथेति गुरुपुत्रोक्तमनुज्ञायेदमब्रवीत् | धर्मा ह्यस्योपदेष्टव्या wat ये गृहमेधिनाम् । ५१॥
aad च कामं च fet चानुपूर्वश: । प्रह्रादायोचतू राजन् प्रश्रितावनताय च ।५२॥
यथा त्रिवर्गं गुरुभिरात्मने उपशिक्षितम्। न साधु मेने तच्छिक्षां द्वन्द्वारामोपवर्णिताम् । ५३॥
यदाऽऽचार्य परावृत्तो गृहमेधीयकर्मसु। वयस्यैर्बालकैस्तत्र सोपहूत: कृतक्षणै: । ५४॥
अथ AM श्लक्ष्णया वाचा प्रत्याहूय महाबुध: । उवाच विट्वांस्तन्निष्ठां कृपया प्रहसन्निव । ५५॥
ते तु तद्गौरवात्सर्वे त्यक्तक्रीडापरिच्छदा:। बाला न दूषितधियो द्वन्द्वारामेरितेहितै: rue
पर्युपासत राजेन्द्र ततन्न्यस्तहृदयेक्षणा: | तानाह करुणो मेत्रो महाभागवतोऽसुर: 1401
Having accepted the advice of the sons of his preceptor (Sukracarya), saying "Let it be
so,” Hiranyakasipu spoke as follows : "As a matter of fact, such duties (alone) should be
taught to him as are proper to kings leading the life of a householder." (51) To Prahrada, who
was not only modest but meek as well, O king (Yudhisthira), they always taught in the proper
order only Dharma (the code of right conduct), Artha (the ways and means of producing and
enhancing wealth), and Kama (ihe correct way of enjoying the pleasures of sense). (52)
Prahrada, (however,) did not approve of the (aforesaid) three objects of human pursuit even
when properly taught to him by his teachers, much less the teaching imparted by those who
feasted their mind upon the objects of sense through feelings of attachment and aversion
etc.(53) (One day,) when the preceptor was away (from the school) in connection with his
household duties, he (Prahrada) was called there (for play) by the boys of his own age, who
had (now) found time to make merry. (54) Answering their call in sweet words, Prahrada (who
was very wise and) who was aware of their devotion (to himself), then kindly addressed them
as though smiling. (55) Laying aside (their) playthings out of respect for him, however, all
those boys, whose judgment had not (yet) been vitiated by the precepts and actions of those
who delighted in sense-enjoyments through feelings of attachment and aversion etc., sat
round him, O king of kings, with their heart and eyes fixed on him; and the Asura (Prahrada),
who was an eminent votary of the Lord and who was (most) compassionate and friendly
(towards them), spoke to them (as follows). (56-57)

