Dis. 13] BOOK FOUR । 351

PREECE TEED EAP OEM EEN EET eH ELM RR AERA HI GR HR ROM RR ROR ROR HM a Re HR
न्र्त्त

मन्ये महाभागवतॆ नारदं देवदर्शनम्। aa प्रोक्त: क्रियायोग: परिचर्याविधिर्हरे: । ३ ।
स्वधर्मशीलैर पुरुषैर्भगवान् यज्ञपूरुष: । इज्यमानो भक्तिमता नारदेनेरित: किल । ४ ।
arent देवर्षिणा ca वर्णिता भगवत्कथा: । मह्यं Bye WER कात्सर्न्यनाचष्टुमर्हसि । ५ ।

Vidura said : Who were these Pracetas and whose offspring were they, O Maitreya
of sacred vow? In whose line were they known (to have been born) and where did they have
their sacrificial session? (2) | account Narada as a great devotee of the Lord and as one who
has directly perceived the Lord. It is he who taught (in his magnum opus, the Paficaratra
Agama) the Yoga of active devotion in the form of a (detailed) procedure of worshipping Sri
Hari. (3) It is said that, full of devotion, Narada extolled the Lord, who is the Deity presiding
over sacrifices, while He was being worshipped (through a sacrificial performance) by the
Pracetas (who were devotees of the Lord and) addicted to their own religious duty. (4) Be
pleased, O holy sage, to reproduce in full the stories of the Lord, which were narrated on that
occasion by the celestial! sage (Narada), keen as । am to hear them. (5)

qaqa diene: wa: पितरि प्रस्थिते वनम्। सार्वभौमश्रियं नैच्छदधिराजासनं पितु: । ६ ।

स wren frag: समदर्शन:। ददर्शं लोके विततमात्मानं लोकमात्मनि |

आत्मानं ब्रह्म निर्वाणं प्रत्यस्तमितविग्रहम्। अवबोधरसैकात्म्यमानन्दमनुसन्ततम् 1 cal

अव्यवच्छिन्नयोगाग्निदग्धकर्ममलाशय: । स्वरूपमवसरुन्धानो नात्मनोऽन्यं तदॆक्षत । ९ ।

जडान्धबधिरोन्मत्तमूकाकृतिरतन्मति: | लक्षित: We बालानां प्रशान्तार्चिरिवानल: 1201

Tat तं जडमुन्पत्तं कुलवृद्धा: समन्तिण: । वत्सरं yor चक्रुर्यवीयांसं wa: सुतम् । ११

Maitreya said : When his father retired to the woods, Utkala, Dhruva’s (eldest) son, felt
no inclination to accept the imperial fortune and the imperial throne of his father. (6)
Cogenitally possessed of a tranquil mind, free from attachment and viewing everything with
an equal eye, he saw his own self projected throughout the universe and the universe as
existing in his own self. (7) The impurities (still) lurking in his mind in the form (of impressions)
of (evil) actions (done in the past) having been burnt by the fire of uninterrupted (practice)
of Yoga (meditation), he looked upon his (individual) soul as no other than the tranquil
Brahma (Infinite)—wherein all differences are set at rest forever, and which is one's real
Self—and hence identical with the joy of consciousness, all-blissful and extending every-
where, and no longer perceived anything apart from his own self. (8-9) Possessing the
exterior of a stupid, blind, deaf, dumb or mad man, but unlike any of these in mind, he was
seen onthe road by the ignorant like a fire that has ceased to emit flames. (10) Thinking him
to be dull and insane, the elders of the (royal) house as well as the ministers made Vatsara,
his younger brother and son of Bhrami (Utkala's stepmother), the ruler of the globe. (11)

स्वर्वीथिर्वत्सरस्येष्टा भार्यासूत षडात्मजान्। पुष्पार्णं तिग्मकेतुं च इषमूर्जं aq जयम् । १२॥
पुष्पार्णस्य प्रभा भार्या दोषा च द्वे बभूवतु: । प्रातर्मध्यन्दिनं सायमिति ह्यासन् प्रभासुता: 12931
प्रदोषो निररिथो व्युष्ट इति दोषासुतास्त्रय: । व्युष्ट: सुतं पुष्करिण्यां सर्वतेजसमादधे ies
स चक्षु: सुतमाकूत्यां wea मनुमवाप ह। मनोरसूत महिषी विरजान्नड्वला सुतान् । १५॥
पुरु कुत्सं fa qa सत्यवन्तमृतं ब्रतम् । अग्निष्टोममतीरात्रे प्रद्युम्नं शिबिमुल्मुकम् ।१६॥
उल्मुकोऽजनयत्पुत्रान्पुष्करिण्यां षडुत्तमान्। अङ्गं सुमनसं ख्यातिं क्रतुमङ्गिरसं गयम् ।१७।
सुनीथाङ्गस्य या पत्नी सुषुवे वेनमुल्बणम् । यद्दो:शील्यात्स राजर्षिर्निर्विण्णो निरगात्पुरात् । १८।
