Dis. 47 ] BOOK TEN 305

Genny, OIRO र्श्वण Cs ee Oe REE OTE TR RR eH RTT EHR

Uddhava said : Oh, you (Gopis) have (all) your objects accomplished indeed and are
the adored of (all) the worlds in that your mind is so (fully and exclusively) absorbed in Lord
Vasudeva. (23) Devotion to SriKrsna indeedis sought to be attained through charitable gifts,
fasting, austerities pouring oblations into the sacred fire, muttering prayers, study of the
Vedas, self-control and various other virtuous practices. (24) Itis a matter for congratulation
that the ideal of supreme devotion to the divine Lord of excellent renown—which is hard to
attain even for sages—has been set up by you. (25) It is (further) gratifying (to note) that you
(all) have sought the Supreme Person under the name of Sri Krsna neglecting (your)
children, husbands and other relations, dwellings, nay, (your very) bodies. (26) Due to (your)
separation (from the Lord) you have developed exclusive devotion to Sri Krsna (which has
enabled you to behold Himin all that meets the eye). (Nay,) youhave conferreda (great) boon
on me (by thus affording me an opportunity to witness your unprecedented love with my own
eyes), O highly blessed ones ! (27) (Now) listen to the message of your Darling (Sri Krsna),
which ( am sure) will bring joy to you and carrying which I, who execute His secret
commissions, have come (to you), O good ladies ! (28)

भवतीनां fart मे न हि सर्वात्मना क्वचित् am भूतानि भूतेषु खे वाव्वग्निर्जलं मही ।
`तथाहं च मन:प्राणभूतेन्द्रियगुणाश्रय: 128 |

आत्मन्येवात्मनाऽऽत्मानं सृजे हन्म्यनुपालये । आत्ममायानुभावेन भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मना । ३०1

आत्माज्ञानमय:शुद्धोव्यत्पिरॆक्तोऽषुप्क्का:।सृषुप्तिस्वप्नजाप्नद्भिप्रश्मिवृतिष्पिरौयते 1३१1

ina ध्यायेत मृषा स्वप्नवदुत्थित: | तन्निरुन्ध्यादिन्द्रयाणि विनिद्र: प्रत्यपद्यत 1321

Wad: समाम्नायो योग: सांख्यं मनीषिणाम्। त्यागस्तपो दम: सत्यं समुद्रान्ता इवापगा: ।३३॥

The glorious Lord says : Your separation from Me, the material cause of all (and
therefore presentin all as their very Self), is not possible under any circumstance. (Just) as
the (five gross) elements—(viz.,) ether, the air, fire.water and earth—are present in (all)
created beings (as their constituents), so am |, underlying as | do the mind, the vital airs, the
elements, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and the
(three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (29) In Myself (as the ground) do | create, maintain and
(then) dissolve Myself (in the form of the cosmos) by dint of My own Maya (creative energy)
by Myself in the form of the elements, the Indriyas and the Gunas. (30) The Spirit is all
knowledge, transcendent, unconnected with the (three) Gunas and (absolutely) pure
(untainted by Maya). It is experienced through the (various) states of the mind (viz.,
wakefulness, the dream state and deep sleep), brought about by Maya. (31) Remaining
vigilant (all the time), one should (therefore endeavour to) control that mind through which
one conceives the (various) objects of sense (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell),
though unreal—ike one who, when awake, recalls the objects seen in a dream—and seizes
the senses. (32) In the eyes of the wise, (the teachings of) the Vedas, the (eightfold) path of
Yoga, the Sankhya system of philosophy (which differentiates Matter from the Spirit),
renunciation, suffering hardships for the sake of one's faith, subjugation of one’s senses and
truthfulness have their goal in mind-contro| even as rivers terminate in the ocean. (33)

ag भवतीनां वै दूरे ad प्रियो दृशाम्। मनस: सन्निकर्षार्थं मदनुध्यानकाम्यया ।३४॥
am दूरचरे प्रेष्ठे मन sta वर्तते dint च न तथा चेत: सन्निकृष्टेऽक्षिगोचरे 1341
naa मन: कृत्स्नं विमुक्ताशेषवृत्ति यत्। अनुस्मरन्यो मां नित्यमचिरान्मामुपैष्यथ ।३६॥
या मया क्रीडता रात्र्यां वनेऽस्मिन् व्रज आस्थिता: । अलब्धरासा: कल्याण्यो माऽऽपुर्मद्वीर्यचिन्तया ३७1
