354 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

HECK LS ESM NSLHSE HEH EA HELO HOHE HAH ETESE EHH OCHA AEE LTE HAHAH CHP HHSC RAAAR OLENA SHE

as fascination to their hearts; so He will be called a Raja (a king in the truest sense of ‘he who
pleases’ ). (15) He is immovable in His promise and purpose, He never deviates from truth,
He loves the Vedas and the Brahmanas (those who are devoted to the Vedas); He serves
those who are advanced in age; He is ever ready to give shelter to all beings (who are in
distress or danger, whoever they be); He knows how to honour others; He is affectionate and
compassionate to the poor. (16) He regards and reveres the wives of others as His mother
and loves His own wife as a half of His own body. Heis loving as a father to those over whom
He rules; He looks upon Himself as a servant to those who are well-versed in the Vedic
lore.(17) He is supremely dear to all as if He were no other than their own self; Heis a constant
source of increasing delight and joy to His friends and relations. He particularly seeks the
company of persons who are free from all ties of attachment (to the world). He is ever up with
arms of punishment against those who are evil-minded. (18)

अयं तु साक्षाद्भगवांस्त्यधीक: Hew आत्मा कलयावतीर्ण: |
यस्मिन्नविद्यारचितॆ निरर्थकॆ पश्यन्ति नानात्वमपि प्रतीतम् ।१९॥
अयं भुवो मण्डलमोदयाद्रेगोप्तिकवीरो नरदेवनाथ: ।
आस्थाय जैत्रॆ रथमानत्तचाप: पर्यस्यते दक्षिणतो यशथार्क: ।२०॥
अस्मै नृपाला: fo तत्र तत्र af हरिष्यन्ति सलोकपाला: |
Tera एषां faa आदिराजं चक्रायुधं तद्यश उद्धरन्त्य: IRL
aaa गां दुदुहेऽधिराज: प्रजापतिर्वृत्तिकर: प्रजानाम् ।
यो लीलयाद्रीन् स्वशारासकोट्या भिन्दन् समां गामकरोद्यथेन्द्र: 1221
विस्फूर्जयन्नाजगवं धनुर स्वयं यदाचरत्क्ष्मामविषह्यमाजो |
तदा निलिल्युर्दिशि facet लाङ्गूलमुद्यम्य यथा मृगेन्द्र: 1231
एषोऽश्वमेधान् शतमाजहार सरस्वती प्रादुरभावि TI
अहारषीद्यस्य हयं पुरन्दर: शतक्रतुश्चरमे वर्ततमाने 12% |
एष स्वसद्मोपवने समेत्य सनत्कुमारुं भगवन्तमेकम् ।
आराध्य wa लभतामलें we यतो aa परं विदन्ति । २५॥
aa तत्र गिरस्तास्ता इति विश्रुतविक्रम: | श्रोष्यत्यात्माश्रिता गाथा: पृथु: पृथुपराक्रम: । २६॥
दिशो विजित्याप्रतिरुद्धचक्र: स्वतेजसोत्पाटितलोकशाल्य: |
सुरासुरेन्दैरपगीयमानमहानुभावो भविता पतिर्भुव: 12191
"He is the Person Supreme directly manifested to men, the Lord of the three worlds; He
is divinity absolute. He is the Spirit pure thatis there as the self-contained Soul in every living
individual: in the exercise of one of His divine functions He has appeared as a superman
among men. When He is fully realized in His truth, the apparent multiplicity of the world due
to ignorance will all disappear in him as phantoms in Reality. (19) He is the protector of the
terrestrial sphere from the quarter of sunrise (to that of sunset), a unique warrior and King
of kings that He is. Seated in his triumphant chariot, (fearlessly) armed with a bow (and
arrows), He will travel over the world, as the sun travels along the circle of the zodiac in his
celestial journey, from the south to the north. (20) Wherever He will be in course of His

travels, the kings will come to acknowledge His supremacy with tributes and offerings and
it is believed that the guardians of the regions will follow the kings. Their consorts will think

