SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 1

,
3 .. TFG FERRET TO IM fete Nee Rate SRR ATA NARHA WAT BAC AOR OR A ROA ANCHE EP NES HERR NE ARN

iowever, | stand refreshed as it were and endowed with extreme comeliness. | have now
yecome quite young (again) acquiring a most lovable exterior. (50) These two sons of mine
ying here are, however, experiencing (great) agony due to exhaustion. Leaving this place,
am (now) proceeding to another place. (51) My sons have attained old age: 1am afflicted
vith this agony. Though their mother, why should | be young and wherefore should my
sons be old ? (52) Although we three live together, why stands this incongruity ? The
jatural thing is that the mother should be old and the sons young, (53) With a mind seized
with wonder | deplore myself. Kindly declare, O sage, what may be the cause of this, O
repository of Yoga ! (54)

नारद उवाच
ज्ञानेनात्मनि पड्यामि सर्वमेतत्तवानघे । न विषादस्त्वया कार्यो af: at ते करिष्यति । ५५1

Narada replied: With the eye of intuition | perceive in my mind all this misery of yours
(as well as its cause), O sinless one | You should not give way to despondency.Sri Hari will
bring you happiness. (55)
सूत उवाच

क्षणमात्रेण तज्ञात्वा वाक्यमूचे मुनीश्वर: । ५६1

Sita continued : Having come to know the reality ina moment, Narada (the great sage)
spoke as follows. (56)

ARG उवाच
शृणुध्वावहिता बाले युगोऽयं दारुण: कलि: । तेन YA: सदाचारो योगमार्गस्तपांसि च 1५७1

जना अधघासुरायन्ते हाठ्यदुष्कर्मकारिण: । इहं सन्तो विषीदन्ति serra ह्यसाधव: |
धत्ते ad तु यो धीमान् स धीर: पण्डितोऽथवा ।५८।
अस्पृश्यानवलोक्येयं ङोषभारकरी धरा । वर्षे ak क्रमाज्जाता मङ्गलं नापि दृश्यते । ५९1
न त्वामपि aa: साकं कोऽपि पङ्यति साम्प्रतम् । उपेक्षितानुरागान्धैर्जर्जरत्वेन संस्थिता । ६०॥
वृन्दावनस्य संयोगात्पुनस्त्वं तरुणी नवा । धन्यं वृन्दावनं तेन भक्तिर्नृत्यति यत्र च ।६१।
अत्रेमौ ग्राहकाभावान्न जरामपि मुञ्चत: | किञ्चिदात्मसुखेनेह प्रसुप्तिर्मन्यतेऽनयो: । ६२1

Narada said : Listen attentively, O young woman ! The present is the terrible age of Kali.
Righteous conduct, the path of Yoga (union with God) and austerities have disappeared
under its influence. (57) Practising roguery and evil deeds people are turning out to be (so
many) replicas of the demon Agha (whose story appears in Srimad Bhagavata X. xii). In this
age (of Kali) righteous men remain dejected and the unrighteous feel overjoyed indeed . That
clever manalone who maintains firmness in this age is learned and wise. (58) Year after year
this earth is graddally becoming a burden for Lord Sega (the serpent-god). It is not worth
looking at or (even) touching ( with one's feet). No sign of good luck is to be seen (anywhere)
either. (59) Nobody even perceives you with your sons at present. Neglected by men blinded
with love for pleasures, you stand enfeebled . (60) Due to contact with Vrndavana you have
become young and fresh again. Deserving of praise therefore is Vrndavana, where Bhakti
dances (with joy). (61) These two (sons of yours, however) are not able to shake off their
oldage due tolack of men having demand for them here. Their deep slumber hereis believed
to have been brought about by the partial gratification of their self ( through their contact with
the Lord). (62)
