Dis. 31 ] BOOK TEN 233

eee Pr ee ies rere eek ee kee ee es Re rk ik ed

the other women in the forest, thereupon thought herself to be the most lovely of all the
women. (She said to herself,) "Abandoning the other Gopis, that loved Him, the Darling is
enjoying my company (alone)!” (36-37) Then, reaching a certain part of the forest, she
arrogantly said to Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva), "lam unable to
walk (any more); carry me wherever it pleases you." (38) Requested thus, the Lord replied
to His lady-love, "Mount my shoulder (then) !" After that, (however, as soon as the lady tried
to mount His shoulder),Sri Krsna disappeared and the said lady repented (in the following
words):—(39) "My most beloved lord, O delighter of my soul, where are you, where are you,
Omighty-armed one, pray reveal your presence, Ofriend, tome, your wretched servant."(40)
Tracking the path of the Lord (still further), the cowherd women perceived not very far from
them their afflicted female companion confounded due to her separation from her beloved
Lord. (41) The Gopis felt highly astonished to hear the account narrated by her as also how
she had received honour from Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi) and how (again) through (her
own) wickedness she had met with disregard at His hands. (42)

ततोऽविशान् वनं चन्द्रज्योत्स्ना यावद् विभाव्यते । तम: प्रविष्टमालक्ष्य ततो निववृतु: fea: ।४३1
तन्मनस्कास्तदालापास्तद्विचेष्टास्तदात्मिका: । तद्गुणानेव गायन्त्यो नात्मागाराणि सस्मरु: SE |
WA: पुलिनमागत्य alee: कृष्णभावना: | समवेता जगु: कृष्णं तदागमनकाङ्खिता: ।४५॥

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहेस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कनधे पूर्वार्घे रासक्रीडायो कृष्णान्वेषणं नाम ase: 1301

Again (in her company) the (cowherd) women penetrated the forest (further) so long as
moonlight was visible. Perceiving (however) the darkness had set in they returned from that
(very) point. (43) With their mind absorbed in Him, talking of Him, imitating His various
activities, nay, identified with Him and singing His praises alone, the cowherd women didnot
recollect their own body, much less their homes. (44) Coming back to the sandy bank of the
Kalindi, thinking of that Enchanter of souls (alone), and seized with a longing for His return,
they sang of Sri Krsna in a chorus. (45)

Thus ends the thirtieth discourse entitled "The Gopis' Quest for Sri Krsna during the Rasa
Play.” in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SSINSINST:

अथैकत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXl
The Gopis’ Song (at the Lord's disappearance) during the Rasa Play
waft ass won an saa इन्दिरा हाश्वदत्र हि ।
aa दृश्यतां दिक्षु तावकास्त्वचि धृतासवस्त्वां विचिन्वते । १ ।
