Dis. 5 ] BOOK FIVE 455 .

RRR A ER TREE AEE EEE EE AHR E EET HEE SEERA EE tee OAR ERA HK Ee

Lord Rsabha began : This (human) body in the mortal world does not deserve to be
given up to (the pursuit of) sensuous pleasures, which are (really) a source of misery and
which are enjoyed even by swine, dogs and other animals (that feed on ordure). It is worthy
of being devoted, My beloved sons, to sublime austerities whereby the mind is purified; and
from purity of mind follows the unending bliss of absorption into the Absolute. (1) The wise
speak of service rendered to exalted souls as an open gate to liberation and the fellowship
of those who are fond of women as the door opening into hell. (And) they alone are (really)
great who are. even-minded, exceptionally calm and composed, free from anger, kind-
hearted and pious or again they who regard love offered to Me as the (only) object of human
pursuit, who take no delight in (the company of) men (solely) engaged in pursuits (merely)
calculated to nourish their body nor in a household consisting of wife, children and (earthly)
riches, and who have no selfish interest in the world beyond the maintenance of their
body. (2-3) An erring soul commits sin only when he endeavours to gratify his senses. |
(however) do not regard those actions as good, from which has followed this body, which
though (really) non-existent, is (yet) a source of misery to the Jiva. (4) The real nature of the
soul remains obscure due toignorance only so long as the Jiva does not enquire into the truth
about the Spirit. (Again) so long as actions continue to be performed, the mind remains
disposed to activity, and itis due to such a mind that the Jiva remains tied to a body. (5) (The
true nature of) the Spirit being thus veiled by ignorance, the past actions of a man render his
mind prone to activity. And so long as there is no love for Me, Lord Vasudeva, the Jiva is not
rid of its identification with a body. (6) So long as the Jiva, oblivious of its (real) self-interest,
does not come to its senses and realize the activity of the Indriyas (the senses of perception
and the organs of action) as unreal (something not belonging to it), the fool soon forgets its
own essential nature and finding a home providing sexual enjoyment (as a characteristic
feature), suffers torments (of various kinds) there. (7)

अतो गृहक्षेत्रसुताप्तवित्तैर्जनस्य मोहोऽयमहं ममेति । ८ ।
यदा मनोहृदयग्रन्थिरस्य कर्मानुबद्धो «GS आश्लथेत।
war जन: सम्परिवर्ततेऽस्माद् मुक्त: परं यात्यतिहाय हेतुम्।९।
हंसे गुरौ ae भक्त्यानुवृत्या वितृष्णया द्वन्द्वतितिक्षया च।
सर्वत्र जन्तार्व्यसनावगत्या जिज्ञासया तपसेहानिवृत्त्या।१०॥
मत्कर्मभिर्मत्कथया च नित्यं मद्देवसङ्गाद् गुणकीर्तनान्मे।
निर्वैरसाम्योपशमेन पुत्रा जिहासया देहगेहात्मबुद्धे: । ११
weg ब्रह्मचर्येण श्वद् असम्प्रमादेन चमेन वाचाम्।१२॥
सर्वत्र मद्धावविचक्षणेन ज्ञानेन विज्ञानविराजितेन।
am धृत्युद्यमसत्त्वयुक्तो लिङ्गं व्यपोहेत्कुशलोऽहमाख्यम्।१३॥
कर्माशयं हृदयग्रन्थिबन्धमविद्ययाऽऽसादितमप्रमत्त:।
अनेन योगेन यथोपदेशं सम्यग्व्यपोह्योपरमेत योगात्।१४॥
The union as husband and wife of a man with a woman, the wise speak of it as another
knot binding their hearts together (apart from the subtle knot, in the shape of identification

with the body, already existing in their heart individually). Itis due to this (other knot) that (over
and above the body, mind and senses etc.), a man erroneously regards a house, fields,
