708 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

SEW CME HES REE AG Re REE HE Be Se BERR REAM RAR A TR EE LT EE ETE RE OME

because, of whom the (whole) wortd feels satisfied ? (15-16) Hail to You, the all-propitious
and all-tranquil Lord, the embodiment of Sattva, and (as such) the Delighter of all | Hail to
You, who are never frightful though assuming Rajas, and are never deluded though
assuming Tamas ! (17)
Yd उवाच
एवं स्तुतत स भगवानादिदेव सतां wh: iahqs: sean प्रहसंस्तमभाषत ।१८॥

Sita continued : Highly pleased, when extolled thus, the aforesaid Lord, the foremost

of the gods and the resort of the righteous, heartily laughed, and with a cheerful mind replied

to the sage (as follows). (18)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
at guy न: कामं वरदेशा ad त्रय: । अमोघं alt dai cel ae विन्दतेऽभृतम् 1१९1
ब्राह्मणा: साधव: TA नि:सङ्का भूतवत्सला: । एकान्तभक्ता अस्मासु निर्वैरा: समदर्शिन: 1201
सलोका लोकपालास्तान् वन्दन्त्र्चन्युपासते । अहं च भगवान् ब्रह्मा स्वयं च हरिरीश्वर: 1२१॥
न ते मय्यच्युतेऽजजे च भिदामण्वपि चक्षते । नात्मनश्च जनस्यापि ae ger वयमीमहि 1221
न ह्यम्मयानि त्तीर्थानि न देवाश्चैतनोज्झिता: । ते पुनन्त्युरुकालेन यूयं दर्शनमात्रत: 1231
ब्राह्मणेभ्यो नमस्यामो येऽस्मद्रूपं त्रयीमयम्। बिभ्रत्यात्मसमाधानतप:स्वाध्यायसंयमै: । २४॥
श्रवणाद् दर्शनाद् वापि महापातकिनोऽपि व: । शुध्येरन्नन्त्यजाश्चापि किमु सम्भाषणादिभि: 1241

The glorious Lord said: Ask of Us a boon of your choice, since We three (viz., Brahma,
Visnu and Myself) are Masters of those who are capable of granting boons. Our sight can
never go in vain; it is through us that a mortal can attain immortality. (19) Not only the
guardians of the spheres including (the denizens of) those spheres but Myself, the glorious
Brahma andthe almighty Sri Hari Himself salute, worship and wait upon Brahmanas who are
pious (by nature), tranquil (free from envy etc.), devoid of attachment, yet affectionate
towards (all) created beings, are exclusively devoted to Us and (as such) free from animosity,
and look upon all with an equal eye. (20-21) They do not perceive the least difference
between Me, Lord Visnu and Brahma (the birthless creator), nor between themselves and
another living being; therefore, We resort to you. (22) Sacred places do not consist of holy
waters (alone) nor do lifeless idols alone represent the gods. They (the sacred waters and
lifeless idols) purify a man through a long process of time, whereas (saints like) you purify
through mere sight. (23) We bow to the Brahmanas, who cherish our (verbal) manifestation
in the form of the three Vedas through concentration of the mind, reflection, study and self-
control. (24) By merely hearing about you or seeing (people like) you even great sinners and
the lowest born too get purified; what wonder, then, that people should get purified by
conversing with you and so on. (25)

सूत उवाच

sft चन्द्रललामस्य धर्मगुह्योपबृंहितम्। वचोऽमृतायनमृषिर्नातृप्यत् कर्णयो: पिबन् । २६॥
स fat मायया विष्णोरश्रामित: कर्शितो sem शिववागमृतध्वस्तक्लेशपुञ्जस्तमब्रवीत् । २७॥

Sita took up the thread again : The sage did not feel sated while drinking in the words
of Lord Siva (who wears the crescent as an omament on His head), which were full of the
secret of Dharma (virtue) and the (very) abode of nectar (as it were) to the ears. (26) Having
been made to revolve for long by the Maya (deluding potency) of Lord Visnu, and subjected
toa severe trial, the sage was relieved of all his afflictions by the nectar-like words of Lord
Siva and spoke to Him (as follows). (27)
