80 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA . .. ..[0७ऽ.19
PORE RR RR RR RM A RRR ERR RRR ROR BRT RA RY We Re BERT HORT RORY eR RT BER RR HE He BY Re eR MRE BE EBERT RY HRT BE Be We Be Be RY Me Br Be Rr Hr Be

Sita continued : Now the king too felt much troubled at heart at the thought of his
reproachful conduct, and said to himself: "Oh! like a vulgar man | have behaved very
ignobly with that innocent Brahmana_ of hidden spiritual power. (1) As a result of the
disrespect shown by me to the Lord Himself (in the form of that saint) some calamity,
hard to overcome, will surely befall me not long afterwards. Let it come directly on me
by all means for the expiation of my sin, so that | may not have the courage to repeat
it. (2) Let fire in the shape of the angered Brahmana race consume this very day the
kingdom, the army and the rich treasury of my accursed self, so that | may not harbour
a sinful thought with regard to the Brahmanas, the gods and the cows hereafter." (3)
While thus reflecting, he presently heard how death impelled by (the curse of ) the sage's
son awaited him under the appellation of Taksaka. He looked upon the fire-like poison
of Taksaka as a blessing; for he thought the same would speedily arouse dispassion in
him who was deeply attached to the world. (4) Now renouncing this as well as the other
world, both of which he had already concluded as worth rejecting, and recognizing the
adoration of Sri Krsna’s feet as superior to everything else, he sat down on the bank of
the Ganga (the river of the immortals) with a resolve to fast till death. (5) The Ganga
carries in it the water which excels all other waters due to its contact with the dust of
Sri Krsna's feet mixed with lovely Tulasi leaves borne on them, and sanctifies all the
worlds both above and below along with their guardian deities (Indra and others). What
dying man would not resort to this holy river ? (6) Having thus resolved upon fasting
till death on the bank of the Ganga (which flows from the feet of Lord Visnu), and shaken
off all attachment (to the world), king Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) took a vow to lead the
life of a hermit and fixed his mind on the feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation)
with undivided devotion. (7) There arrived with their pupils sages of great spiritual power,
who brought sanctity to the whole world. Under the pretext of visiting holy places the saints
generally consecrate the places of pilgrimage themselves. (8) (There came) Atri, Vasistha,
Cyavana, Saradvan, Aristanemi, Bhrgu and Angira, Parasara (the father of Vedavyasa),
Vigwamitra (the son of Gadhi) and Rama (more popularly known as Parasurama),
Utathya, Indrapramada and Idhmavaha, Medhatithi, Devala, Arstisena, Bharadwaja,
Gautama, Pippalada, Maitreya, Aurva, Kavasa, the jar-borm sage Agastya, the island-born
Vedavyasa and the divine sage Narada as well as other distinguished celestial and
Brahmana sages and eminent royal sages besides other sages such as Aruna. Seeing
the foremost of many Rsi families gathered there, the king received them with due honour
and bowed his head to them. (9—11) When they were all comfortably seated, he made
obeisance to them once more and, standing before them with joined palms, told them
with a guileless heart what he intended to do. (12)

राजोवाच
ae वं `धन्यतमा नृपाणां महत्तमानुग्रहणीयशीला: |
राज्ञां कुलं ब्राह्मणपादशौचाद् दूराद् विसृष्टं बत valet । १३
तस्यैव «ote परावरेशो व्यासक्तचित्तस्य ` Weyer
निर्वेदमूलो द्विजश्ञापरूपो यत्र प्रसक्तो TTR A RI
a मोपयातं प्रतियन्तु fam गङ्गा च देवी धृतचित्तमीशे ।
द्विजोपसृष्टद॥ कुहकस्तक्षको वा aa गायत विष्णुगाथा: 124
पुनश्च भूयाद्भगवत्यनन्ते रति: प्रसङ्गश्च तदाश्रयेषु |
महत्सु यां यामुपयामि सृष्टिं मैत्र्यस्तु ada नमो द्विजेभ्य: eel
