Dis. 8] BOOK TEN 133

कज् न् Ireciniri eof treoioen rn ion NOI SriCe ion श्लिक Sot e re tire 6 ten शाशा ion soit sr am a toe fee tee

ज्योतिषामयनं साक्षाद् यत्तज्ञानमतीन्द्रियम्। प्रणीतं भवता येन पुमान् aq परावरम् 4 ।
त्वं fe ब्रह्मविदां oy: संस्कारान् कर्तुमर्हसि । बालयोरनयोर्नृणां जन्मना ब्राह्मणो गुरु: । ६ ।

Sri Suka began again : Importuned by Vasudeva, Garga, the (family) priest of the
Yadus, who was a very great ascetic, O king, repaired to Nanda's Vraja. (1) Supremely
delighted to see him and rising (from his seat) with joined palms by way of welcome Nanda
worshipped him, prostrating himself at the very outset and recognizing him to be Lord Visnu
(who is above sense-perception). (2) Delighting the sage with sweet words when hospitality
had been offered to him and he was comfortably seated, Nanda said, “O holy one, whatcan
we do for you, who are fully gratified (and want nothing)? (3) The stirring out of exalted souls
(like you) is directed towards the supreme good of men (like me) attached to their household
and distressed in mind, O venerable sage, and is never meant otherwise. (4) A (popular)
treatise on astrology—from which proceeds the knowledge of supersensuous phenomena
and through which (any) man can know the cause (of his present happiness and misery in
the shape of past good and evil deeds) as well as its effect (in the shape of the pleasurable
and painful experiences of this life}—has been directly composed by you. (5) (Besides being
a master of astrology) you are the foremost of the knowers of Veda and are (thus) qualified
to perform the purificatory rites (such as the naming ceremony) with respect to these two
boys; fora Brahmana is the preceptor of (all) men by virtue of his (very) birth. (Hence itis not
essential that such rites should be performed by one's own preceptor)." (6)

गर्ग उवाच
यदूनामहमाचार्य: wags भुवि सर्वत: । सुतं मया संस्कृतं ते मन्यते देवकीसुतम्। ७ ।
ae पापमति: सख्यं aa चानकदुन्दुभे: । देवक्या अष्टमो wif न स्री भवितुमर्हति । ८ ।
इति सञ्चिन्तग्र॰-छ्रुत्वा देवक्या दारिकावच: 1 अपि हन्ताऽऽगताङाङ्कस्तर्हि तन्नोऽनयो भवेत् । ९ ।

Garga replied : । am the (family) priest of the Yadus and known (as such) all over the
globe. People would take your son, if consecrated by me through purificatory rites, as
Devaki's son. (7) Pondering that the eighth progeny of Devaki ought not to be a girl, ever
since he has heard the remark of Devaki’s daughter (that his slayer has been born
somewhere) and bearing in mind the friendship (subsisting) between you and
Anakadundubhi, the evil-minded Karnsa may have his suspicion (easily) aroused (by My
performing the purificatory rites with respect to your sons, that Vasudeva’s eighth child has
been removed to your house and is being brought up here by you). If (therefore, God
forbid), he should kill your son (under such suspicion), that would (prove to) be a (serious)
blunder on our part. (8-9)

नन्द उवाच
अलक्षितोऽस्मिन् रहसि मामकैरपि गोव्रजे। कुरु द्विजातिसंस्कारं स्वस्तिवाचनपूर्वकम् ।१०॥
Nanda said : Unperceived even by my (own) people, (kindly) perform in this cow-pen in

secret the purificatory rite the naming ceremony appropriate to a member of the twice-born
classes, after uttering the benedictory hymns. (10)

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं सम्प्रार्थितो fas: स्वचिकीर्षितमेव तत्। चकार नामकरणं गूढो रहसि बालयो: । ११।
