Dis. 12] “BOOK THREE 185
ORE Mt MT NE AT BY RB ES ET FE EE ET TE YG Re RE Tr RR ७७७७
(the god of love), Anger from his brows, and Greed from his lower lip, Vak (the goddess of
speech) from his mouth, the oceans from his penis, and Nirrti (the chief of the Raksasas and
the regent of the south-west), the spirit presiding over sin, from his anus. (26) The sage
Kardama, the spouse of Devahiti (the mother of Lord Kapila) and a master of his self, was
evolved from his shadow. (In this way) the whole of this creation was evolved either from the
mind or from the body of Brahma (the maker of the universe). (27)

art दुहितरं तन्वीं स्वयम्भूर्हरतीं मन: | अकामां चकमे ara: सकाम इति न: श्रुतम् । २८।
तमधर्मे  कृतमति विलोक्य पितरं सुता:। मरीचिमुख्या मुनयो विश्रम्भात्प्रत्यबोधयन् ।२९॥
नैतत्पूर्वै: कृतं त्वद्य न करिष्यन्ति चापरे।यत्त्वं दुहितरं गच्छेरनिगृह्याङ्गजं प्रभु: । ३०॥
तेजीयसामपि ह्येतन्न Gear जगद्गुरो । यद्वृत्तमनुतिष्ठन् वै लोक: क्षेमाय कल्पते । ३१॥
wea aH भगवते य इदं स्वेन रोचिषा। आत्मस्थं व्यञ्जयामास स et पातुमर्हति 132!
स इत्थयं गृणत: पुत्रान् पुरो a प्रजापतीन्। प्रजापतिपतिस्तन्वं तत्याज व्रीडितस्तदा ।
तां feet जगृहुर्घोरां नीहारं यद्विदुस्तम: 123 |

कदाचिद् ध्यायत: Beda आसंश्चतुर्मुखात्। कथं Bea लोकान् समवेतान् यथा पुरा । ३४
चातुर्होत्रं कर्मतन्त्रमुपवेदनयै: We | धर्मस्य पादाश्चत्वारस्तथैवाश्रमवृत्तय: 13% |

Vidura, we are told that, eager to push on the work of creation, Brahma (the self-born)
fell in love with his own daughter, Vak, who was most handsome and captivating, but she
had nocarnal desire in her.* (28) Finding that their father had set his heart on unrighteousness,
his sons, Marici and the other sages, remonstrated with him out of filial affection: (29) “It is
strange that you, a master of your self, should seek to copulate with your own daughter,
unable to control your passion! It is something which was never done by your predecessors
in office (the Brahmas that preceded you) nor will it be done hereafter by your successors
(the Brahmas that are going to follow you). (30) This is not something praiseworthy even for
the all-powerful, O preceptor of the world ! For itis by following the conduct of such people
that the world finds its way to happiness. (31) Obeisance to the Lord who by His own light
of wisdom manifested this universe, which already lay dormant in Him! May He protect the
cause of righteousness." (32) Brahma (the lord of Prajapatis) felt much ashamed to see his
own sons, the lords of created beings, thus pleading with him before his very eyes, and
immediately cast off his body. The four quarters picked up that fearful body, which continued
in the form of fog, also known by the name of darkness. (33) Once when Brahma (the
Creator) was pondering how should he be able to create the worlds as an organic whole as
before, the four Vedas issued from his four mouths (one from each). (34) Even so the four
supplementary Vedas, logic and other allied sciences (such as dialectics, Mimamsat and
so on), the functions of the four priests required to officiate at a sacrificial performance, the

* Even though Brahma, who had been commissioned by the Lord to carry on His own work of creation and has been
spoken of above as the first seer (Adikavi), Vedagarbha (a repository of the Vedas) and Vedamurti (Veda personified), and
who had not only been blessed by the Lord never to fall a prey to delusion while proceeding with the work of creation but had
been admiited by Him as having known His truth (vide Ill. ix. 34-36 above), could not evidently have stooped to such depths
of moral degradation. The incident is only intended to illustrate the blindness of passion and to justify the note of warning
sounded by our wise forefathers not to seé even One's own mother, sister or daughter when she was all alone. We read
elsewhere in Srimad Bhagavata itself—

मात्रा स्वस्ना दुहित्रा वा न विविक्तासना भवेत् ।बलवानिन्दियग्रामा विद्वांसमपि कर्षंति 11 (1X. xx. 17)

*One should never remain alone even with one's own mother, sister or daughter. Powerful are the senses, which lead
astray even a learned man.”

t A system of philosophy concerning itself chiefly with the correct interpretation of the Vedic ritual and text.
