346 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 54

DRO RR SSO ROR CIRCE TNR OCR STUY SIDER Oy 8 ere oo 8 Sor TON on egos a eae

Self, subjects the soul (which is essentially free from birth and death) to metempsychosis. (45)
There is no union or disunion of the Self with or from any other substance (such as the body,
or the eye with which it is perceived), there being no such substance (other than the Self),
Ovirtuous lady, and the appearance of such other substances (as the body or the eyes) being
attributable to the Self (alone), (just) as there is no union or disunion of the sun with or from
the eye and colour (both of which owe their existence and appearance to the sun itself). (46)
Changes commencing from birth (and ending in death) pertain to the body alone and never
to the soul, (just) as waxing and waning etc., pertain to the phases (of the moon) and not to
the moon itself (which is ever the same). And indeed death (of the body) is attributed to the
soul in the same way as the total disappearance of illumination is spoken of as Amavasya
(denoting the disappearance of the moon itself). (47) (Just) as a dreaming man perceives
his own self (as invested with a body etc.,) as well as the objects of perception (sound, taste
and so on), and also experiences pleasure, pain etc. as the fruit of his past doings), even
though none of these (really) exists (not even the body through which he seems to enjoy the
pleasures etc., his actual body lying inert all the while), so does the ignorant Jiva undergo
transmigration. (48) Therefore, completely getting rid—through realization of Truth—of grief
born ofignorance, that withers and infatuates the soul, be consoled, O young lady of beautiful
smiles ! (49) .
श्रीगुक उवाच

एवं भगवता तन्वी wan प्रतिबोधिता । वैमनस्यं परित्यज्य मनो बुद्ध्या समादधे ।५०॥

wore उत्सृष्टो द्विड्भिर्हतबलप्रभ:। स्मरन् बविरूपकरणं वितथात्ममनोरथ: 1421

ae भोजकटं ae Roe महत् पुरम्। अहत्वा दुर्मतिं कृष्णमप्रत्यूह्य adem

कुण्डिनं न प्रवेक्ष्यामीत्युक्त्वा तत्रावसद् SAT 1421
Sri Suka went on: Shaking off disconsolation when thus comforted by Lord Balarama,

the slim lady eased her mind by recourse to reason. (50) Allowed to escape with life alone,
his army as well as his glory having been smashed by his enemies (the Yadus), and his own
hopes belied, and brooding over his disfigurement, Rukmi built for his residence a large city,
Bhojakata by name. (Solemnly) declaring that he would not (re-) enter Kundinapura without
killing the evil-minded Krsna and recovering Rukmini (his younger sister), he lived there in
a spirit of indignation. (51-52)

भगवान् भीष्मकसुतामेवं निर्जित्य भूमिपान्। gers विधिवदुपचेमे कुरूद्वह ।५३।

तदा महोत्सवो yt यदुपुर्यां गृहे गृहे। अभूदनन्यभावानां कृष्णे यदुपतौ FW । ५४॥

नरा नार्यश्च मुदिता: प्रमृष्टमणिकुण्डला: | पारिवर्हमुपाजह्रुर्वरयोश्चित्रवाससो: । ५५॥

सा ee ।

सिक्तमार्गा मदच्चयुद्भिराहूतप्रेष्ठभूभुजाम् । TST परामृष्टरम्भापूगोपञ्ञोभिता । ५७

कुरुसृञ्जयकैकेयविदर्भयदुकुन्तय: 1 मिथो मुमुदिरे तस्मिन् सम्भ्रमात् परिधावताम् । ५८॥

रुक्मिण्या हरणं श्रुत्वा गीयमानं ततस्तत: । राजानो राजकन्याश्च बभूत्रुर्भृशाविस्मिता: 1421

द्वारकायामभूद् राजन्` महामोद: पुरौकसाम्। रुक्मिण्या रमयोपेतं ser कृष्णं Gra: पतिम् । ६०॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्या संहितायां दञमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे रुक्मिण्युद्वाहे चतु-पञ्चादात्तमोऽध्वाय: |e
Having thus completely routed (hostile) kings and brought Rukmini (the daughter of

Bhismaka) to Dwaraka, the Lord espoused her with due ceremony, O jewel among the Kurus !
(53) Great was the festivity on that occasion in the house of all men at Dwaraka (the city of
