26 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

मागा CHECK म्मि eK Sete ee enw ee eww hs ee trent He seeker eAeepseeertrentivhereveneeeene nner

sacrifices). (36) The whole extent of land from the point where the sun rises to the point where
it sets is called the territory of Mandhata, the son of Yuvanaswa. (37)

शशबिन्दोर्दुहितरि बिन्दुमत्यामधान्नृप: । पुरुकुत्समम्बरीषं Wat च योगिनम् ।
त्तेषां स्वसार: VET सौभरि वव्रिरे पतिम् । ३८1

यमुनान्तर्जले dee: परंतप: । निर्वृतिं मीनराजस्य वीक्ष्य मैथुनधर्मिण: ise
जातस्पृहो नृपं fas: कन्यामेकामयाचत | सोऽप्याह गृह्यतां wer कामं wan स्वयंवरे 1४०॥
a विचिन्त्याप्रियं स्रीणां जरठोऽयमसम्मत:।वबलीपलित एजत्क इत्यहं SRT: 1४१॥
mee तथाऽऽत्मानं सुरस्रीणामपीप्सितम्। किं पुनर्मनुजेन्द्राणामिति व्यवसित: प्रभु: 1४२॥
मुनि: प्रवेशित: क्षत्रा कन्यान्त-पुरमृद्धिमत्। वृतश्च राजकन्याभिरेक: पञ्चाशता at ।४३॥
Tat कलिरभूद् भूयांस्तदर्थेऽपोह्य सोहदम्।ममानुरूपो ad च इति तद्गतचेतसाम् [४४॥

The emperor (M&ndhaia) begot through (his queen) Bindumati, the daughter of Sagabindu,
(three sons, viz.,) Purukutsa, Ambarisa and Mucukunda, (who turned outto be) a mystic. (Alll)
the fifty sisters of these (princes) chose (the sage) Saubhari for their husband. (38)
Submerged in the water of the (holy) Yamuna and practising supreme asceticism (there), the
Brahmana (Saubhari) conceived a longing for conjugal delight on seeing the happiness of
a leader of fish pairing with other fish of the opposite sex, and (accordingly approached and)
asked the king (Mandhata) for a girl {in marriage). The emperor too said (in reply), “Leta girl
be gladly taken by you in the event of your being chosen by her of her own will, O holy
Brahmana !” (39-40) The sage (Saubhari) thought within himsel—"I have been (indirectly)
refused by the emperor, thinking me to be unwelcome to women, knowing (as he does) that
lam disliked by them, being old, covered with wrinkles and grey-haired with my head shaking
(all the time). (41) | shall (therefore) make myself so perfect (faultless of limbs) as to be
coveted even by celestial women, much more by human princesses,” Thus resolved, the
powerful sage was ushered by the chamberlain into the gynaeceum set apart for the
princesses, which was full of luxuries (of every description), And (lo !) that one individual
was desired by (all) the fifty princesses to be their husband. (42-43) (Nay,) there arose a
great quarrel over him among those girls, so that casting sisterly affection to the winds, they
said to one another, "Heis fit for me and not for (any of) you,” their heart being set on him.(44)

= fi feraa:fB परिच्छदे .
गृहेषु नानोपवनामलाम्भ:सरस्सु सौगन्धिककाननेषु ॥४५॥
महार्हशाय्यासनवस्त्रभूषणस्नानानुलेपाभ्यवहारमाल्य कै: i
स्वलेकृतस्त्रीपुरुषेषु नित्यदा रेमेऽनुगायद्द्विजभृङ्गवन्दिषु 1४६1

यद्गार्हस्थ्यं तु संवीक्ष्य सप्तद्वीपवतीपति: । विस्मित: स्तम्भमजहात् सार्वभौमश्रियान्वितम् 1४७1
एवं गृहेषभिरतो विषयान् विविधै: सुखै: ! सेवमानो न चातुष्यदाज्यस्तोकैरिवानल: 1४८॥

The said sage Saubhari (who, being a student of Rgveda, was a master of powerful
Mantras) revelled with them everyday in mansions that were equipped with invaluable
appendages by his inexhaustible wealth of saceticism, and which were not only crowded
with men and women (servanis and maidservants) well-decked with ornaments but were
also full of singing birds and bees and panegyrists—as well as on the margin of lakes of
limpid water studded with beds of Kalharas and in parks of every description, using valuable
beds and seats, cosily wearing appare! and precious jewels and taking delight in baths,

pigments, eatables and flowers. (45-46) Observing the (luxurious) household life of
Saubhari (even) Mandhata {the ruler of the entire globe consisting of the seven Dwipas),

* The Sruti says:—'a आत्या अङ्गान्यत्या देवता:` (He is the body of which the other gods are (so many) limbs).
