Dis. 17 ] BOOK EIGHT 805
RECREATES AREER ESRC RASS OLALARSERELSL ELS SS RAEAEL EL LT TR ee Te ee
त्तयाजा व व ह ता वा HHH Ha aH

Therefore, fully disciplined, observe this vow with reverence, 0 blessedone! Highly gratified
(through this), the Lord will speedily grant (all) the objects of your desire. (62)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "The procedure of (observing the
vow of) Payovrata disclosed to Aditi? in Book Eight of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

स्रे Pat Binet १
FIFI RA eS

अथ सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVII
The Lord manifests Himself before Aditi and grants her desired boon
YH उवाच

इत्युक्ता सादिती राजन्स्वभरत्रा se ai अन्वतिष्ठदु व्रतमिदं द्वादशाहमतन्दिता । १ |
चिन्तयन्त्येकया बुद्ध्या महापुरुषमीश्वरम् । प्रगृह्येन्दरियदुष्टाश्चान्मनसा बुद्धिसारथि: । २ ।
मनश्चैकाग्रया बुद्ध्या भगवत्यखिलात्मनि । वासुदेवे समाधाय चचार ह पयोव्रतम् । ३ |
Te: प्रादुरभूत्तात भगवानादिपूरुष: | पीतवासाश्चतुर्बाहु: शङ्खचक्रगदाधर: । ४ ।
तं नेत्रगोचरं वीक्ष्य सहसोत्थाय सादरम्। ननाम Ufa कायेन दण्डवत् प्रीतिविह्वला । ५ |

सोत्थाय बद्धाञ्जलिरीडितुं स्थिता aie आनन्दजलाकुलेक्षणा |

aya तूष्णीं पुलकाकुलाकृतिस्तद्दर्शनात्युत्सवगात्रवेपथु: । ६ |

wien शनैर्गद्गदया गिरा हरिं gaa सा देव्यदिति: कुरूद्वह ।

Set सा पिबतीव चक्षुषा रमापतिं agai जगत्पतिम् । ७ |

Sri Suka resumed: Thus instructed by her husband, the sage Kagyapa, the celebrated
Aditi unweariedly and duly observed the aforesaid vow for twelve days consecutively,
contemplating (all the time) on the almighty Lord, the supreme Person, with undivided
intellect. Curbing the unruly horses in the shape of the senses with (the rein of) her mind and
focussing the mind with her one-pointed reason on Lord Vasudeva, the Soul of all, Aditi, who
had reason for her charioteer (guide), duly observed the vow of Payovrata. (1—3) Before her
(eyes) appeared, O dear Pariksit, (at the conclusion of her vow) the almighty Lord, the most
ancient Person, who was clad in yellow, was endowed with four arms and bore a conch, a
discus and a mace (in three of them). (4) Seeing Him suddenly before her (very) eyes and
overwhelmed with joy, resulting from love, she rose (from her seat) and reverently bowed (to
Him) with her body lying prostrate on the ground.(5) Rising (once again), she stood up with
joined palms to glorify Him, but could not, her eyes flooded with tears of joy, and remained
quiet, her body bristling all over with hair standing on end and her limbs shaking with
excessive joy at His sight. (6) In a faltering voice, O jewel of the Kurus, that heavenly lady,
Aditi, (who had in the meantime recovered a bit) lovingly and slowly extolled Sri Hari (While
doing so) she stood looking up (Sri Hari evidently standing in the air before her) as though
drinking with her eyes the (said) Spouse of Rama (Goddess Laksmi), the Lord (bestowing
the fruit) of sacrifices and the Ruler of the universe. (7)
