Dis. 6] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 41

SoBe HREM Ae Art A He Ge Se ERE A BY BRT RT MT Hr He He Re Be BMT RR MA A Be Br Pt Be Be RARE He Be Be Re Ee Re RON Re He Be Pe RRR ea ४ . RY RR eB Re Hr He Be HO
ee ee व ता ता सा सा eee सा Se HH Br ST ST ST

फलाहारेण वा भाव्यमेकभुक्तेन वा WA: | सुखसाध्यं भवेद्यत्तु कर्तव्यं श्रवणाय तत् ।४२॥
भोजनं तु at wa कथाश्रवणकारकम्।नोपवासो वर: she: कथाविघ्नकरो यदि ।४३॥
Starting the exposition from sunrise the highly intelligent exponent should properly
expound the story (of Srimad Bhagavata) in a moderate tone for three Praharas and a half
(ten hours and a half).(38) At midday a pause should be made in the exposition for about
an hour. During that interval the votaries of Lord Visnu should as a matter of fact take to
the chanting of the Lord's names and glories in consonance with the theme of exposition
of that day. (39) For controlling the urge for the evacuation of one's bowels and bladder a
light diet is as a matter of fact conducive to happiness, One who seeks to hear an exposition
of Srimad Bhagavata should (accordingly) take his meal only once (a day) and take only
such food as fit to be offered as an oblation to the sacred fire. (40) He should hear the
exposition abstaining from food for (full) one week provided he has the stamina (to do it)
or he can do so with ease living on ghee or milk (alone). (41) Or he may live on fruits and
vegetables etc., or even on one species of cereals (alone with vegetable etc.). In order (to
be able) to listen to the exposition one should take such a vow as can be easily
observed.(42) | should certainly prefer taking a meal if it would enable one to listen to an
exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. A fast (on the other hand) is not commended if it stands in
the way of hearing the exposition. (43)

सप्ताहव्रतिनां पुंसां नियमाञ्छृणु ane! विष्णुदीक्षाविहीनानां नाधिकार: mend ।४४॥
ब्रह्मचर्यमध:सुप्ति:; war च भोजनम्। कथासमाप्तौ भुक्तिं च कुर्यान्नित्यं कथाव्रती ।४५॥
fees मधु तैलं च गरिष्ठान्ने तथैव च । भावदुष्टं पर्युषितं जह्यान्नित्यं कथाव्रती ।४६।॥
कामं क्रोधं मदं मानं मत्सरं लोभमेव dia मोहं तथा द्वेषं दूरयेच्च कथाव्रती ।४७॥
वेदवैष्णवविप्राणां गुरुगोव्रतिनां तथा ।स्रीराजमहतां fret वर्जयेद्य: कथाव्रती iwc
रजस्वलान्त्यजम्लेच्छपतितव्रात्यकैस्तथा । द्विजद्विड्वेदबाह्यैश्च न वदेद्य: कथाव्रती ।४९॥
सत्यं tet cat मौनमार्जवं विनयं तथा । उदारमानसं तद्वदेवं कुर्यात्कथाव्रती । ५०॥
esa att रोगी निर्भाग्य: पापकर्मवान्। अनपत्यो मोक्षकाम: supers कथामिमाम् 142 |
अपुष्पा काकवन्ध्या च वन्ध्या या च मृतार्भका | ATR च या AN तया श्राव्या प्रयत्नत: । ५२॥
एतेषु विधिना श्रावे तदक्षयतरं भवेत्। अत्युत्तमा कथा दिव्या कोटियज्ञफलप्रदा 1431

(Now) hear, 0 Narada! the rules of conduct that should be followed by those who have
taken a vow to hear (an exposition of ) Srimad Bhagavata in the course of a week. Those who
have not (yet) been (duly) initiated into the worship of Lord Visnu (or received from a qualified
Guru a Mantra sacred to Him) are not eligible for hearing (an exposition of ) Srimad
Bhagavata. (44) A man who has taken a vow to hear an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata (as
aforesaid) should constantly (during the period) observe continence, sleep on the floor (or
on a plank-bed but in no case on a bedstead ) and take his meals on leaves joined together
(or on a single leaf if itis big enough) at the end of the exposition (for the day). (45) One who
has taken the aforesaid_vow should always avoid (during the period) pulses, honey oil and
heavy food_as well as such edibles as are vitiated by impure associations (e.g., a fruit with
blood, red peel or kernel such as cherry or ripe tomato, or one with a fleshy kernel, such as
the jack-fruit) and cooked food which has been kept overnight. (46) A man who has taken
the aforesaid vow should eschew _concupiscence, anger, arrogance, pride, jealousy and
greed too as well as hypocrisy, infatuation and hatred. (47) He who has taken the aforesaid

