496 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

PEK REHOVOT H HAH CREE HR ESEEK EPONA EEE REEL EE EE TE See RR oe Te

गयाद्गयन्त्वां चित्ररथ: सुगतिरवरोधन इति Aa: TAT बभूवुश्चित्ररथादूर्णायां सम्राडजनिष्ट | १४ ॥ तत
उत्कलायां मरीचिर्मरीचेर्बिन्दुमत्यां बिन्दुमानुदपद्यत तस्मात्सरघायां मधुर्नामाभवन्मधो: सुमनसि
वरीरव्रतस्ततो भोजायां wey जज्ञाते wet: सत्यायां भौवनस्ततो दूषणायां त्वष्टाजनिष्ट
त्वष्टुर्विरोचनायां विरजो विरजस्य शतजित्प्रवरं पुत्रशतं कन्या च विषूच्यां किल जातम्। १५
तत्रायं श्लोक:--
प्रैयव्रतं वंशमिमं - विरजश्चरमोद्भव: | अकरोदत्यलं teat faq: सुरगणं यथा। १६ |
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे प्रियव्रतवंशानुकीर्तनं नाम पञ्जदशोऽध्याय:। १५ |

From (the loins of) Gaya, through (his wife) Gayanti, sprang up three sons, Citraratha,
Sugati and Avarodhana by name; and from Citraratha, through Urna, came Samrat. (14)
From Samrat, through Utkala, sprang up Marici and from (the loins of) Marici, through
Bindumati, Binduman was born. From Binduman, through Saragha appeared (a son) Madhu
by name; from Madhu through Sumana, sprang up Viravrata and from Viravrata, through
Bhoja, Manthu and Pramanthu were born; from Manthu, through Satya, appeared Bhauvana;
from Bhauvana, through Dusana, Twasta was born; from Twasta, through Virocana, came
Viraja; (and) from the loins of Viraja, through Visuci, were born a hundred sons, the eldest
of whom was Satajit, anda daughter (too). (15) About Viraja runs the following verse:"Viraja,
the last-born (in the line), adorned this race of Priyavrata by his glory even as Lord Visnu
brought glory to the gods (by appearing in their midst as Vamana, the divine Dwarf). (16)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled “The posterity of Priyavrata," in Book
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

gk POT १० १६
CII pre

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI
A description of the terrestrial world
राजोवाच
दृश्यते। १। तत्रापि प्रियव्रतरथचरणपरिखातै: सप्तभि: aa सिन्धव उपक्लृप्ता यत एतस्या:
विजिज्ञासामि। 21 भगवतो गुणमये स्थूलसरूपं आवेशितं मनो ह्यगुणेऽपि सूक्ष्मतम आत्मज्योतिषि at
ब्रह्मणि भगवति वासुदेवाख्ये क्षममावेशितुं ae faq गुरोऽर्हस्यनुवर्णयितुमिति । ३।

The king (Pariksit) said : You have described the extent of the terrestrial globe as
covering the whole range where the sun shines and where, on the other hand, the yonder
moon with the host of (other) heavenly bodies is visible. (1) Within that very extent are
comprised the seven oceans formed by the seven furrows dug by the (revolving) wheels of
the chariot of Emperor Priyavrata; anditis to these (oceans) indeed that you have ascribed,

O glorious sage, the division of the earth into seven distinct Dwipas (subdivisions). | have’
a desire to know all this in detail with the extent and characteristic features (of the various
