200 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

सि २ व 8 SIE ttre gorse चिन्र ers drainer

our husband." (5) Rising early in the morning when called by their names (by other girls), they
loudly sang the praises of Sri Krsna as they went with their hands mutually clasped to bathe
in the Kalindi everyday. (6)

नद्यां कदाचिदागत्य dix निक्षिप्य पूर्ववत्। वासांसि कृष्णं गायन्त्यो विजह्रु: सलिले मुदा । ७ ।

भगवांस्तदभिप्रेत्य कृष्णो योगेश्वरेश्वर: | वयस्थैरावृतस्तत्र गतस्तत्कर्मसिद्धये । ८ ।

तासां वासांस्युपादाय नीपमारुह्य सत्वर: । हसद्भि: प्रहसन् बालै: परिहासमुवाच ह । ९ |

अत्रागत्याबला: A स्वं स्वं वास: प्रगृह्यताम्। सत्यं ब्रवाणि नो नर्म we यूयं व्रतकर्शिता: । १०॥

न मयोदितपूर्वं वा अनृतं तदिमे विदु:। एकैकश: प्रतीच्छध्वं सहैवोत सुमध्यमा: 1291

Arriving at the river on a certain day (the last day of the month, viz., the full moon, when

they weré going to conclude their vow) and leaving their clothes on the bank as usual, they
merrily sported in the water glorifying Sri Krsna. (7) Coming to know of this and surrounded
by His companions, Sri Krsna, the Lord of (all) Masters of Yoga, went there in order to reward
their act (of worship). (8) Taking their clothes, He hastily climbed up a Kadamba tree (near
by) and, indulging in fun with the laughing boys, so the tradition goes, jestingly spoke as
follows—(9) "Coming here, O maids, receive you each your own raiment at will. । speak the
iruth and am notjesting since you are (all) exhausted by (observing) the vow. (10) Neverhas
a lie been told by Me before; these boys know it. Take your clothes one by one or all together
(as you please), O slender-waisted ones." (11)

तस्य तत् क्ष्वेलितं दृष्टा गोष्य: प्रेमपरिष्रुता: । व्रीडिता: प्रेक्ष्य चान्योन्यं जातहासा न निर्ययु: 122

एवं ब्रुवति गोविन्दे नर्मणाऽऽक्षिप्तचेतस: | आकण्ठमग्ना: aii वेपमानास्तमब्रुवन् 22 |

मानयं भो: कृथास्त्वां तु नन्दगोपसुतं प्रियम्। जानीमोऽङ्ग व्रजरुलाघ्यं देहि वासांसि वेपिता: । १४॥

Tama ते दास्य: करवाम तवोदितम्। देहि वासांसि धर्मज्ञ नो Sq राज्ञे ब्रुवामहे eu

Perceiving that joke of the Lord the cowherd maids were overwhelmed with love.

Abashed to see one another, they felt inclined to laugh, but did not come out (of the
water).(12) When Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) remarked thus, the cowherd maids,
whose mind was enraptured by the joke and who stood shivering, immersed as they were
up to the neck in the cold water, spoke to Him (as follows):—(13) "Pray, do no wrong by us.
We know you well to be the beloved son of Nanda, the cowherd chief, and praised all over
Vraja, O dear Krsna ! Please return our clothes; we are shivering (with cold). (1 4) 0 Fair one
with a dark-brown complexion ! we are your servants and are prepared to do your bidding.
(Therefore), give back our clothes, O Knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) !
lf not, we shall report the matter to the king." (15)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
भवत्यो यदि मे दास्यो मयोक्तं वा करिष्यथ | अत्रागत्य स्ववासांसि प्रतीच्छन्तु छुचिस्मिता: ।१६॥
ततो जलाशयात् सर्वा दारिका: ङीतवेपिता: । पाणिभ्यां योनिमाच्छाद्य side: शीतकर्शिता: । १७॥
भगवानाह ता वीक्ष्य शुद्धभावप्रसादित: | स्कन्धे Frere वासांसि sia: प्रोवाच सस्मितम् । १८॥
बद्ध्वाञ्जलिं मूर्ध्यपनुत्तयेंजहस: कृत्वा नमोऽधो वसनं प्रगृह्यताम् Rg |
इत्यच्युतेनाभिहिता ब्रजाबला मत्वा विवस्त्राप्रवनं व्रतच्युतिम् ।
तत्पूर्तिकामास्तदेषकर्मणां साक्षात्कृतं नेमुरवद्यमृगु चत: 1201
तास्तथावनता «SBT भगवान् देवकीसुत: | वासांसि ताभ्य: प्रायच्छत् करुणस्तेन तोषित: 1221
