40 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

PERERA REMT SE CRT द्६ HB BT HT HTML Gi CNT ATRL Ys He RE RRR Re HR eT RR Re Re Re Pe ०

Tt: wt स्नीत्वमपास्तपेशलं fri aq ay pda
यासां गृहात्पुष्फरलोचन: पतिर्न जात्वपैत्याहतिभिर्हृदि स्पृशान् । ३०॥

vx "Verily He is the same eternal Person, who abides in His singular undifferentiated Self
even during the night of universal dissolution prior to the manifestation of the three Gunas
(modes of Prakrti), when the individual souls retire into God, the Universal Spirit, and when
all the forces of creation (the Mahat and its evolutes) too lie dormant (in the Unmanifest).(21)
Itwas He who with the intention of endowing with a form and name the Spirit, who has neither,
then inspired His Prakrti—which deludes the Jivas,who are identicalin essence with Him and
which, impelled by His own energy (the Time-Spirit), is disposed to create—and revealed the
Vedas and other scriptures. (22) Indeed, He is the same Supreme Spirit whose reality in this
world is perceived by seers who have subdued their senses and fully controlled their breath,
with a mind yearning for His sight and cleansed of all impurities through Devotion; for it is
He alone who can thoroughly cleanse our heart (which cannot be so purified by any other
means, such as Yoga etc.). (23) Again, O friend, He is the same supreme Lord, whose
sacred stories have been sung again and again in the Vedas and other esoteric scriptures
by seers (like Maharsi Vyasa) that have expounded profound truths, and who in His own
sportful ways creates, maintains and reabsorbs the universe all by Himself (without any
material), and yet does not set attached to the same. (24) Whenever kings whose intellect
is clouded by Tamas (ignorance) live by unrighteousness, verily it is He who by recourse
to the quality of pure Sattva (goodness) reveals in Himself the divine attributes of
omnipotence etc., as well as truthfulness, righteousness, compassion and superhuman
activity, and assumes various forms from age to age for the good of the world. (25) Oh, how
supremely praiseworthy is the race of Yadu, that has been honoured by this Supreme
Person, the Lord of Sri (the goddess of prosperity), through His descent therein. Andoh! how
supremely sacred is the forest associated with the name of the demon Madhu (the area of
Vrajanear aboutthe city of Mathura) that has been graced by Him through His ramblings. (26)
Ah! the city of Kusasthali (Dwaraka) overshadows the fame of heaven and brings merit and
renown to the earth (by its association); for the people of that city always behold their Lord
(Sri Krsna) casting His smiling looks on them whenever He graciously moves out of His
palace. (27) Surely God Almighty (who is no other than Sri Krsna) must have been
thoroughly propitiated (in some previous birth) through fasts, ablutions (in sacred waters)
oblations to the sacred fire etc., by the ladies whose hand has been espoused by Him, in that
they constantly drink. O friend, the nectar from His lips, the very thought of which maddened
the women of Vraja. (28) Oh ! how blessed are His eight principal consorts, Rukmini (who
gave birth to Pradyumna), Jambavati (the mother of Samba) and Nagnajiti (who bore Amba)
and so on—who were carried off as prizes of valour at an assembly of suitors after
vanquishing powerful princes like Sigupala (the king of the Cedis), and those others who
were brought in thousands after slaying the demon Naraka (the son of goddess Earth). (29)
These women have brought sanctity to and exalted womanhood, which has not been
allowed freedom and is wantingin purity, inasmuch as their lotus-eyed lord, who ever delight
their heart by His charming behaviours and loving presents (like the celestial tree of Parijata
etc.) and never moves out of their mansions even for a moment."(30)

vafaen गदन्तीनां स गिर: पुरयोषिताम्। निरीक्षणेनाभिनन्दन् सस्मितेन ययौ हरि: 1321
अजातशत्रु: पृतनां गोपीथाय मधुद्विष: । परेभ्य: Ufa: स्नेहात्प्रायुङ्क्त चतुरङ्गिणीम् 1321
अथ दूरागताञ् A: कौरवान् farsa! संनिवर्त्य दृढं स्निग्धान् प्रायात्स्वनगरीं प्रियै: 1331
कुरुजाङ्गलपाञ्चालान् शूरसेनान् सयामुनान्। ब्रह्मावर्तं Hei मत्स्यान् सारस्वतानथ 13x!

