512 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

ज्ज् WE We TM Ge we ATE RE LR REE त्तज ERE RE HET WT ER EE TE त् का कज् कत क चकक RE ES ET AAT

न जन्म नूनं महतो न सौभगं न ae न बुद्धिर्नाकृतिस्तोषहेतु:।

aig नो वनौकसश्चकारॆ सख्ये aa लक्ष्मणाग्नज:।७॥
सुरोऽसुरो aa art नर: सर्वात्मना य: सुकृतज्ञमुत्तमम्।
भजेत owt मनुजाकृतिं et य उत्तराननयत्कोसलान्दिवमिति।८।

"| resort to Him who is of the nature of pure Consciousness, the only entity, who has by
His own divine energy (that constitutes His very being) distanced His potency known by the
name of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), (nay,) who is other than this objective world
and perfectly serene, who can be realized (only) by those possessed of a pure mind, and
who transcends all (material) names and forms andis (absolutely) egoless. (4) The descent
of that omnipotent Lord in a human semblance on this earth is really intended to teach
mankind (the ways of the great) and not merely to exterminate the demon race (which could
be done by His mere will) ! Otherwise how could there be any woes caused by (separation
from) Sita (His divine Spouse) to the supreme Lord, the Soul of the universe, revelling in His
own (blissful) nature ? (5) He is the same as Lord Vasudeva (the abode of the whole
universe)—the greatest friend, (nay,) the very Self of (all) wise men*— not (in the least)
attached to (anything in) the three worlds. He could not (therefore) give way to infatuation
occasioned by (separation from) His Consort nor could He abandon (send into exile)
Laksmanat (except in order to teach the world the ways of the great). (6) Indeed neither
pedigree nor physical charm nor eloquence nor intellectual calibre nor (again) race (the
species of life in which one is born) is conducive to the pleasure of that Supreme being; for
lo ! Sri Rama (elder brother of Laksmana) admitted to His friendship even us, wild beasts
(monkeys), bereft of all these (qualifications) ! (7) Therefore, whether a god or a demon, a
monkey or a human being—whatever one may be—one should resort (for protection) with
all one's being to the noblest Sri Rama—Lord Sri Hari Himself in human semblance—who
is supremely conscious of services done to Him and who (while returning to His divine Abode
at the end of His pastime on earth) led to Heaven (all) the people of north Kosala.” (8)

शमोपरमात्मोपलम्भनमनुग्रहायात्मवतामनुकम्पया तपोऽव्यक्तगतिष्रचरति।९॥। तं भगवान्नारदो
वर्णांश्रमवतीभिर्भारतीभि: प्रजाभिर्भगवत्प्रोक्ताभ्यां सांख्ययोगाभ्यां भगवदनुभावोपवर्णनं सावर्णरुपदेक्ष्यमाण:

नम इति। ११ गायति चेदम्--

* The Lord is, In fact, the friend as well as the Self of all embodied souls without distinction; yet He is spoken of here as
the friend and the Self of wise men in the sense that it is the wise alone who recognize Him as such.

+ We are told in the Ramayana that Lord Sri Rama was cnce closeted with a messenger of the gods Laksmana guarded
the entrance under orders of ihe Lord, who had sirictly warned him not to enter the room himself nor allow anyone else to do
sounder any circumstance, adding that anyone who did so would be beheaded by Him. Meanwhile the irascible sage Durvasa
appeared on the scene and peremptorily demanded that the Lord shouid at once be apprised of his presence, threatening to
curse Him if Laksmana declined to do so. Laksmana preferred to be killed by his divine Brother rather than invite the sage’s
curse on Him and informed the Lord of his arrival. The sage was then ushered into the Lord's presence and respectfully
dismissed after being duly entertained. The Lord now felt very miserable when He though! of the terrible fate which awaited
Laksmana, and remained mute. He then summoned His counsellors and invited their opinion, whereupon the sage Vasistha
exhorted Him to exile Laksmana, which was as good as beheading him. The Lord accepted the advice of His preceptor and
did accordingly.

