Dis. 86] BOOK TEN 485

eee dianensenenateaneneununsenstnnnenanetnnnnnnteneenrererensunnmesentvancnssnes
रथस्थो धनुरादाय Wise भटान्। विद्राव्य क्रोशतां स्वानां स्वभागं मृगराडिव । १०॥
तच्छुत्वा क्षुभितो राम: पर्वणीव महार्णव: । गृहीतपाद: कृष्णेन सुहृद्धिश्चान्वलाम्यत 1221
प्राहिणोत् पारिबर्हाणि वरवध्वोर्मुदा ao: । महाधनोपस्करेभरथाश्वनरयोषित: । १२॥

With the consent of her parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) as well as of Sri Krsna he took
her away (one day) even as she drove out of the fort in a chariot to visit an important
temple.(9) Taking his seat in her chariot Arjuna took up his bow and putto flight all the gaflant
warriors who tried to intercept him. In the midst of Subhadra’s own people screaming (in
distress) Arjuna stole her away just as the king of beasts would carry away its prey. (10)
Hearing of this, Balarama was agitated tike the ocean on a full moon and got pacified (only)
when Sri Krsna and other friends and relations clasped His feet (and tried to appease His
anger).(11) (Then) Balarama joyously dispatched for the bride and the bridegroom presents
in the form of abundant wealth and articles of household use and a number of elephants,
chariots, horses and male and female servants. (12)

SR उवाच
कृष्णस्यासीद् द्विजश्रेष्ठ: श्रुतदेव इति श्रुत: । कृष्णैकभक्त्या पूर्णार्थ: ara: कविरलम्पट: 1231
स gaa विदेहेषु मिथिलायां गृहाश्रमी । अनीहयाऽऽगताहार्यनिर्वर्तितनिजक्रिय: । १४॥
यात्रामात्रं त्वहरहर्दैवादुपनमत्युत | नाधिकं तावता तुष्ट: क्रियाश्चक्रे यथोचिता: ।१५॥
aM तद्राष्टृपालोऽङ्ग बहुलाश्वच इति श्रुत:। मैथिलो निरहम्मान उभावप्यच्युतप्रियौ । १६॥
Sti Suka began again : (Pariksit,) at Mithila, the capital of the Videha territory there lived
a jewel among Brahmanas, known by the name of Srutadeva, who had all his objects
accomplished by virtue of his single-minded devotion to Sri Krsna and was tranquil (of mind),
full of wisdom and destitute of attraction for sense-objects. Though (he lived the life of) a
householder, he performed (all) his duties and lived on whatever subsistence came to him
without (any) effort. (13-14) Everyday he got by the will of Providence as much as was barely
necessary for his sustenance, and not (a bit) more. (fully) contented with this, he discharged
(all) his duties in the proper manner. (15) Dear Pariksit, the (then) ruler of Mithila was similarly
devoted to the Lord. He was known by the name of Bahulaswa. He was (absolutely) free from
egotism. Both (the king and the Brahmana) were beloved of Sri Krsna (the immortal
Lord).(16)
तयो: wad भगवान् दारुकेणाहतं रथम्। आरुह्य साकं मुनिभिर्विदेहान् प्रययौ wy: । १७॥

anal वामदेवोऽत्रि: कृष्णो रामोऽसितोऽरुणि: । अहं बृहस्पति: कण्वो मैत्रेयञ्च्यवनादय: । १८॥
aA तत्र तमायान्तं th जानपदा नृप। उपतस्थु: सार्घ्यहस्ता ग्रहै: सूर्यमिवोदितम् । १९।

अन्ये च तन्मुखसरोजमुदारहासस्निग्धेक्षणं नूप पपुर्दृशिभिर्नूनार्य: । २०
तेभ्य: स्ववीक्षणविनष्टतमिस्रदृभ्य: क्षेमं त्रिलोकगुरुरर्थदृशं च यच्छन्।
श्रृण्वन् दिगन्तधवलं स्वयञ्ञोऽशुभघ्नं गीतं सुरैर्नृभिरगाच्छनकैर्विदेहान् । २१।

Pleased with them (both), the almighty Lord (once) mounted the chariot brought by
Daruka and drove to the kingdom of Videha, accompanied by (a number of) seers. (17) The
(celestial sage) Narada, Vamadeva, Atri, (my father) Krsnadwaipayana (Vedavyasa),
Paraéurama, Asita, Aruni, myself (Suka), Brhaspati, Kanwa, Maitreya, Cyavana and others
formed the party. (18) At every stage (in the course of the journey), O protector of men, the
citizens and villagers waited upon Him with offerings in their hands, appearing as He did (with
His followers) like the sun surrounded by planets. (19) O king ! (during that journey of the
Lord) the men and women of Anarta, Dhanva, Kurujangala, Kanka, Matsya, Pancala, Kunti
