666 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

Te TIRINE HISIEIn RIC ni Ina Of Reet rei ion ioioioitninine tt @ ¢: fri intent ee ie st se Sete tem A eee 9 Sa ee

their father as a deity. (Pray,) remove this curiosity of ours, O holy one, as to how the hatred
of the father for his son was directed towards the latter's death, my lord ! (45-46)

Thus ends the fourth discourse forming part of the narrative of Prahrada,
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ok CaP OATHS
ru BEE Sires

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४

Hiranyakasipu attempts the life of Prahrada
ARG उवाच

at um प्रापितं बालं see नयकोविदम्। पाठयामासतु: पाट्यानन्यांश्चासुरबालकान् | २ |

यत्तत्र गुरुणा प्रोक्तं शुश्रुवेऽनु पपाठ च । न साधु मनसा AA स्वपरासद्ग्रहाश्रयम् । ३ ।

एकदासुरराद् पुत्रमङ्कमाराप्य पाण्डव | UTES HAA वत्स मन्यते साधु यद्भवान् । ४ |
Narada began again : We are told that the glorious sage Kavya (Sukracarya) was
chosen by the demons to (fill) the office of their priest. (Hence) his two sons, Sanda and
Amarka, lived close to the palace of Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the Daityas). (1) They taught
(all) subjects that were worth teaching to Prahrada—who had been sent (to their house) by
the king (Hiranyakasipu) and, though (yet) a child, was skilled in reasoning—as well as to
otherchildren of the Asuras. (2) He listened to and immediately reproduced what was taught
to him by his teacher there; but at heart he did not approve of it, based as it was on the false
notion distinguishing a friend from a foe. (3) Placing his son (Prahrada) on his lap, one day,
Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the Asuras), O Yudhisthira (son of Pandu), addressed him :—

"Tell me, my child, what you regard as good (for you)." (4)

Were Jara
हित्वाऽऽत्मपातं गृहमन्धकूपं वन गतो यद्धरिमाश्रयेत । ५ ।

Prahrada replied : For (all) embodied souls whose mind is ever disturbed with the false
ideas ofl’ and ‘mine’, | hold this to be good, O chief of demons, that having abandoned one's
home, which degrades one's soul, and is just like a well whose mouth is hidden, one should
go to the woods and take refuge in Sri Hari. (5)

ARG Sara
सम्यग्विधार्यतां बालो गुरुगेहे द्विजातिभि: । विष्णुपक्षै: प्रतिच्छन्नैर्न भिद्येतास्य धीर्यथा । ७ ।

Narada continued: Onhearing the words of his son (Prahrada), fullof faith in Lord Visnu
(who belonged to the hostile party), the demon (Hiranyakagipu) laughed and said :—"The
intellect of youngsters is perverted by the machinations of others. (6) Let the child be properly
guarded, so thathis intellect may notbe perverted by Brahmanas devoted to Visnu and living
incognito at the preceptor's residence." (7)
