Dis. 74 ] BOOK TEN 433

Pete t ee OMEN LENO UTE TAE EE ROE ALE य TE EEE AEE AA २२ न

presented the Lord with robes of yellow silk and ornaments. His eyes being full of tears at
the time, he could not even distinctly see the Form of the Lord. (28) Seeing Him thus
honoured, all those present in the assembly joined their palms in reverence, with shouts of
‘Namo Namah’ (Salutations) and ‘Jaya-Jaya' (Victory to You), and showers of flowers fell on
Him from the heavens. (29)
sa fea दमघोषसुत: स्वपीठादुत्थाय कृष्णगुणवर्णनजातमन्यु: |
उत्क्षिप्य बाहुमिदमाह सदस्यमर्षी संश्रावयन् भगवते परुषाण्यभीत: 1301
et दुरत्यय: ame sf सत्यवती श्रुति: । वृद्धानामपि ae बुद्धिर्बालवाक्यैर्विभिद्यते । ३१॥
ga पात्रविदां ser मा मन्ध्वं बालभाषितम्। सदसस्पतय: सर्वे HPO यत् सम्मतोऽर्हणे । ३२॥
तपोविद्याव्रतधरान् ज्ञानविध्वस्तकल्मषान्। परमर्षीन् ब्रह्मनिष्ठान् लोकपालैश्च पूजितान् ।३३॥
सदस्पतीनतिक्रम्य गोपाल: कुलपांसन:। यथा काक: पुरोडाशं सपर्यां कथमर्हति । ३४॥
वर्णाश्रमकुलापेत: सर्वधर्मबहिष्कृत: । स्वैरवर्ती गुणैर्हीन: सपर्यां कथमर्हति ।३५॥
ययात्तिनैषां हि कुलं wa सद्भिर्बहिष्कृतम्। वृथापानरतं हाश्वत् सपर्यां कथमर्हति ।३६॥
ब्रह्मर्षिसेवितान् देशान् हित्वैतेऽब्रह्मवर्चसम् । समुद्रं दुर्गमाश्रित्य बाधन्ते दस्यव: प्रजा: 1201
एवमादीन्यभद्राणि बभाषे ABU: | नोवाचकिञ्चिद्भगवान्यथा सिंह: शिवारुतम् । ३८।
unaired श्रुत्वा दु:सहं तत् सभासद:। कर्णौ पिधाय निर्जग्मु: ङापन्तश्चेदिपं रुषा । ३९
fret भगवत: शृण्वंस्तत्परस्य जनस्य वा । ततो नापैति a: सोऽपि यात्यध: सुकृताच्युत: ।४०॥
_Pariksit, Sigupala heard all this from his seat in the assembly. Enragedat the glorification
of Sri Krsna, he rose from his seat and holding up his am in greatindignation fearlessly spoke
these harsh words with reference to Sri Krsna. (30) He said, “Leaders of this House, the
pronouncement of the Vedas that Time is God is quite true; for Time is inviolable, its decree
cannot be revoked. (This has been made perfectly clear by the proceedings of this
assembly.) (For) we have seen how even the (hardened) reason of wise and elderly people
can be misled by the prattlings of children. (31) Remember, you are the best judge to decide
who is worthy to receive the honour of first place in this assembly. Therefore, please do not
acceptas gospel truth Sahadeva’s childish talk that Krsnais worthy of that honour. (32) There
are present here men of great austerity, learning and sacred vows, men who have wiped out
their sins through wisdom, great sages who are established in Brahma and adored even by
the greatest of gods. (33) Ignoring the leaders of this assembly, how can this cowherd, a
disgrace to his clan and family, be considered worthy of receiving this honour ? Does the crow
deserve to receive a sacrificial oblation ? (34) He owns no Varna (caste), or ASrama (stage
of life), and does not possess nobility of birth; he is beyond the pale of all Dharmas (sacred
laws) and acts wantonly both against the Vedicinjunctions and established usage. Moreover
he is devoid of all virtues. Under the circumstances, how can he deserve the honour of first
place ? (35) You are aware that his clan is under the curse of Yayati, and has, therefore, been
boycotted by all good people. Moreover, they are all given to unauthorized drinking. How can
he, therefore, be entitled to receive the honour of first place ? (36) Abandoning Mathura and
other sacred places (inhabited by Brahmanical sages), they have resorted toa fortified place
in the sea, destitute of Brahmanas devoted to the Vedas. When they come out of their
fortifications, they harass all creatures like pirates.” (37) Pariksit, all the merits of Sigupala
had been exhausted. That is why he uttered these and similar harsh words with reference
to Sri Krsna. But just as the lion does not heed the jackal's howls, even so the Almighty Lord
did not say a wordin reply to Sigupala. (38) But the vilification of the Lord became unbearable
to the audience, some of whom closed their ears and indignantly left the Hall censuring
