Dis. 10] BOOK SIX ` ३01

डै-धिञ्मौ क ज गी ङ दौ दौ परीजीतीकै क य दौ डौ AHL HEEPAREAAAHEETHEEEARAHH HH Ee KTH PRAMS ES ङी वी OR Rt ee

so on, that exist for others). (8) The everlasting virtue practised by men of sacred renown
consists merely in this thata man himself grieves and rejoices in sympathy with the griefand
joy of his fellow-beings. (9) Oh, what a pity, Oh, how painful itis that a mortal should not serve
others with his wealth, sons and other kinsmen and body, which besides being transitory (by
nature), are not only of no use to him but (really) belong to others. (10)

श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं कृतव्यवसितो दध्यङ्ङाथर्वणस्तनुम्। परे भगवति ब्रह्मण्यात्मानं सन्नयञ्जहौ ie!
यताक्षासुमनोबुद्धिस्तत्त्वदृग् ध्वस्तबन्धन: | आस्थित: परमं योगं न देहं GAs गतम् 1१२॥

Sri Suka continued : Having thus made up his mind and merging his (individual) self in
the Lord, the Supreme Reality, the sage Dadhici, the son of Atharva, dropped his body. (11)
Having controlled his senses, vital airs,mind and intellect, his eyes fixed on the (absolute)
Truth and (all) fetters (in the form of virtue and sin) broken, he established himself in
supreme Yoga (perfect identity with Brahma), so that he did not know when the body
(actually) fell. (12)
ars qaqa] निर्मितं विश्वकर्मणा | मुने: मुंक्तिभिसा॰त्सक्तो भगबत्तेजसा'न्वित: ।१३॥
qt देवगणै३ सर्वैर्गजेन्द्रोपर्यशोभत ।स्तूयमानो मुनिगणैस्त्रैलोक्ये हर्षयन्निव 1१४॥
वृत्रमभ्यद्रवच्छेत्तुमसुरानीकयूथपे: । पर्यस्तमोजसा राजन् क्रुद्धो रुद्र इवान्तकम् 1१५1
तत: सुराणामसुरै रण: परमदारुण: । त्रेतामुखे नर्मदायामभवत् प्रथमे युगे a
रुद्रैर्वसुभिरादित्यैरश्विभ्यां पितृवह्निभि: । मरुद्धिर्ऋभुभि:र॥ साध्यैर्विश्वेदेवैर्मरुत्पतिम् 1१७॥
दृष्टा वज्रधरं शक्रं रोचमानं स्वया श्रिया । नामृष्यन्नसुरा राजन् मृधे वृत्रपुर:सरा: ।१८॥
नमुचि: शम्बरोऽनर्वा द्विमूर्धा ऋषभोऽम्बर: | हयग्रीव: शङ्कुशिरा विप्रचित्तिरयोमुख: 1१९॥
पुलोमा वृषपर्वा च प्रहेतिर्हेतिरुत्कल: | दैतेया दानवा यक्षा रक्षांसि च GEERT: 1201
सुमालिपाळिप्नमुखा: कार्तस्वरपरिच्छदा: | प्रतिषिध्येन्द्रसेनाग्रं मृस्योरपि टुप्तसदम्।२१।
ye: परश्वथै: खड्गं ठ्।तघ्रमभर्भुणुण्डिथि ।सवताऽवाकिरन् Waa a
TASER HOM: WT: WAT: | SaT gM tata नभोघनै: । २४॥
न a झस्त्रास्रवर्षौघा wee: सुरसैनिकान्। fom: सिद्धपथे देवैर्लघुहस्तै: सहस्रधा 1241
अथ क्षीणास्त्रशस्रोघा गिरिशृङ्गद्रुमोपलै: । अभ्यवर्षन् सुरबलं चिच्छिदुस्तांश्च da 1२६॥
Now, taking up the thunderbolt, forged by Viswakarma (the heavenly artisan) out of the
bones of the sage Dadhici, and endowed with the Lord's energy, Indra felt very strong. (13)
Surrounded by all the hosts of gods, he was being extolled by crowds of sages and shone
on (the back of) Airavata (the king of the elephants), as though delighting (all) the three
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region). (14) In order to cut down Vrtra, who was
surrounded by generals of demon cohorts, he assailed the demon with (great) impetuosity
and full of wrath, O Pariksit, even as Rudra (the god presiding over destruction) rushes
against Death (at the time of universal destruction). (15) Thereupon ensued a most fierce
conflict of the gods with the demons on the bank of the (holy) Narmada (river) at the
beginning of Treta during the very first round of the four Yugas (of the current Manvantara,
the Vaivaswata Manvantara). (16) The demons headed by Vrtra, O king (Pariksit), could not
bear to see Sakra (Indra), the king of the gods, armed with the thunderbolt and resplendent

in his native glory on the field of battle and accompanied by the Rudras (the gods presiding
over destruction), the Vasus, the Adityas (the sons of Aditi), the two ASwinikumaras (the
