Dis. 90 ] BOOK TEN 515

ERARAANE CHA NARTH AE ELE ARAREREMRE ल् ग्नन्र 98 9 ४ AE 899 AAAREAELAKEAE ER

uttered destroys (all) evil. Of all forms of Dharma preached and practised by the descendants
of (various) Rsis, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the founder (and fountain-head). He holds in His
hand the discus (which is a symbol of the ever rotating wheel of Time, the all-destroyer).
Under such circumstances, it is no wonder that He should relieve the burden of the earth
(from time to time). (47) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the (sole) asylum of (all) beings. (He is
constantly present everywhere, and yet) they say He manifested Himself from the womb of
Devaki. The Yadava heroes (always) waited on Him (with joined palms). By (the strength of)
His arms He put down (all) unrighteousness. (By His very nature, O king,) the Lord wipes out
the sufferings of all mobile and immobile creatures. By His charming countenance full of
winning smiles He kindled love into the hearts of (the women) of Vraja as well as of the towns,
He is the one conqueror of the whole world. (Victory to Him and Him alone 1) (48)

इत्थं परस्य निजवर्त्मरिरक्षयाऽत्तलीलातनोस्तदनुरूपविडम्बनानि |
कर्माणि कर्मकषणानि यदूत्तमस्य श्रूयादमुष्य पदयोरनुवृत्तिमिच्छन्॥४९॥
भर्त्यस्तयानुसवमेधितया मुकुन्दश्रीमत्कथाश्रवणकीर्तनचिन्तयैति ।
तद्धाम दुस्तरकृतान्तजवापवर्गं ग्रामाद् वनं क्षितिभुजोऽपि ययुर्यदर्था: । ५०॥
श्रीकृष्णचरितानुवर्णनं नाम नवतितमोऽध्याय: ।९०॥

Sk

(Pariksit!) the Supreme Person (who is beyond the realm of Prakrti) sportively assumed
a (transcendental) Form with intent to vindicate the path of virtue chalked out by Himself, and
enacted (many wonderful) sports appropriate to that Form. Everyone of His acts is capable
of cutting asunder the bonds of Karma (of those who contemplate on it). He who'seeks to
gain the privilege of serving the (lotus) feet of Bhagavan Srikrsna, the crown-jewel of Yadus,
should (make it a point to) listen to the stories of His sports. (49) By listening to, chanting and
contemplating on the charming stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna every moment, man develops
the devotion which leads him to the (supreme) sphere of the Lord. (True,) itis (most) difficult
to reach beyond the Jurisdiction of Time; but in the Lord's realm Time has no sway. Even
rulers of the earth have left their kingdom and retired to the forest for (the performance of
austerities with the object of) gaining that eternal realm. (Therefore, one should constantly
engage oneself in hearing the stories of the Lord.) (50)

Thus ends the ninetieth discourse entitled "The Story of (the amorous sports of) Sri Krsna
narratea," in the latter half of Book ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, composed by the
sage Vedavyasa and consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas.

PIRES ee

END OF THE SECOND HALF OF BOOK TEN

ज SN Oe
