678 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

2 rine foto ot ot ining War ee ee eh ee eee Oe He EEA ELK SCS See UKE K Hee ee eeK See eee ee

(which are) products of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively) and the
result of actions, and which are rejected (as attributes of Matter) one should ascertain the
essential character of the Spirit (which is connected with these states) through its association
with the intellect (as the very ground of the latter), even as one comes to know (the presence
of) the air through the (different) odours (that are borne through it). (26) Infact, metempsychosis,
which is perpetuated by the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and actions prompted by them,
is brought about through the intellect. Though rooted in ignorance and (therefore) unreal, it
is postulated as a dream. (27)

तस्माद्भवद्भि: कर्तव्यं कर्मणां त्रिगुणात्मनाम्। बीजनिर्हरणं योग: प्रव्राह्मोपरमो धिय: 1221
तत्रोपायसहस्राणामयं भगवतोदित: । यदीश्वरे भगवति यथा यैरञ्जसा रति: । २९॥
गुरुशुश्रूषया भक्त्या सर्वलब्धार्पणेन च । सङ्खेने साधुभक्तानामीश्वराराधनेन च ।३०॥
श्रद्धया तत्कथायां च कीर्तनैर्गुणकर्मणाम् । तत्पादाम्बुरुहध्यानात् तल्लिङ्गेक्षार्हणादिभि: 1321
ee: सर्वेषु भूतेषु भगवानास्त ईश्चर: । इति भूतानि मनसा कामैस्तै: साधु मानयेत् । ३२॥
एवं निर्जितषड्वर्गे: faa भक्तिरीश्वरे। वासुदेवे भगवति am संलभते रतिम् । ३३॥
Therefore, the (very) seed (in the form of nescience) of actions prompted by the three
Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) ought to be burnt by you. This is (what they call) Yoga (the
highest achievement), which stops the functioning of the intellect. (28) Of the thousands of
devices helpful to it, this alone.has been recommended by the Lord, viz., the practice of
virtues through which love may be duly and easily developed for the almighty Lord. (29) This
can be accomplished by serving one’s preceptor and by offering (to him) with devotion all
that is got by one, nay, through the fellowship of pious devotees and worship of God,
through reverence for stories of the Lord; by celebrating His virtues and exploits, through
contemplation on His lotus-feet and through the sight and worship of His images and so
on. (30-31) (Nay,) one should (as far as possible) duly gratify (the various) living beings with
their objects of desire under the belief that the almighty Lord Sri Hari is present in all created
beings. (32) In this way devotion to the all-powerful Lord Vasudeva is practised by those who
have subdued the six senses (including the mind, the internal sense)—devotion through
which one fully develops love (for Him). (33)

निशम्य कर्माणि गुणानतुल्यान् वीर्याणि लीलातनुभि: कृतानि ।
यदातिहर्षोत्पुलकाश्रुगद्गदे प्रोत्कण्उ उद्गायति रौति नॄत्यति । ३४
चदा ग्रहग्रस्त ga क्वचिद्धसत्याक्रन्दते ध्यायति वन्दते जनम्।
Ge भश्वसन्वक्ति हरे जगत्पते नारायणेत्यात्ममतिर्गतत्रप: । ३५1
तदा पुमान्मुक्तसमस्तबन्धनस्तद्भावभावानुकृतारायाकृति: |
निर्दग्धबीजानुशायो महीयसा भक्तिप्रयोगेण समेत्यधोक्षजम् ।३६॥
अधोक्षजालम्भमिहाशुभात्मन: शरीरिण: संसृतिचक्रशातनम् ।
तद् व्रह्म निर्वाणसुखं विदुर्बुधास्ततो भजध्वं हृदये हदीश्वरम् । ३७॥
कोऽतिप्रयासोऽसुरबालका हरेरुपासने स्वे हदि छिद्रवत् सत: ।
were: wend amr: fe विषयोपपादनै: 1321
Ta: med पशव: सुतादयो Wer मही कुञ्जरकोशाभूतय: |
सर्वेऽर्थकामा: क्षणभङ्गुरायुष: कुर्वन्ति मर्त्यस्य कियत् प्रियं चला: ।३९॥
