Dis. 15 ] BOOK SEVEN 725
SEBO ROI IER ERO RRS ROR SOT eet ft SE tot tr eater tote fii eric 8 ag iintcrrentonetia
प्तर्ज ज न त् वा या तं तं दात् ।

who is ignorant of the truth of the Spirit and is (therefore) given to the (mere) gratification of
his self, will surely kill them. (10) Therefore, (remaining ever) contented, he who knows what
is right should perform from day to day (his) obligatory and occasional duties even with the
cereals fit for (the consumption of) hermits and obtained by force of destiny (rather than
undertake big sacrifices involving destruction of life). (11) He who knows (what is) piety
should give up Vidharma, Paradharma, Abhasa, Upama (Upadharma) and Chala—these
five offshoots of Adharma (vice) (even) as vice (itself, which is directly prohibited). (12)
Vidharma is that which interferes with (the pursuit of) one's own prescribed conduct even
though practised as a virtue; while Paradharma is that which is prescribed for another (and
not for one's own self). A course of conduct recommended in a scripture opposed to the
Vedas or intended to deceive another is Upadharma (or Upama) whereas Chala is that
course of conduct which is justified by distorting the sacred texts, (13) (And) that which has
been originated by men according to their own whim as apart from the (four established)
Asramas or stages in life is (known by the name of) Abhasa. (The aforesaid five surely lead
to frustration.) And in whose case has a course of conduct enjoined by one's own innate
disposition (on the other hand) not proved capable of alleviating distress? (14)

धर्मार्थमपि नेहेत यात्रार्थं वाधनो धनम्।अनीहानीहमानस्य महाहेरिव वृत्तिदा i eu

सन्तुष्टस्य निरीहस्य स्वात्मारामस्य यत् सुखम्। कुतस्तत् कामलोभेन धावतोऽर्थेहया fea: 1261

सदा सन्तुष्टमनस: wal: सुखमया fea: | झार्कराकण्टकादिभ्यो यथोपानत्पद: frail

WWE: केन वा weal वर्तेतापि वारिणा | ओपस्थ्यजैह्वयकार्पण्याद् गृहपालायते जन: । १८॥

असन्तुष्टस्य fara तेजो विद्या तपो यश: । स्रवन्तीन्दियलौल्येन ज्ञानं चैवावकीर्यते । १९।

कामस्यान्तं च क्षुत्तृङ्भ्यां क्रोधस्यैतत्फलोदयात् । जनो याति न लोभस्य जित्वा भुक्त्वा दिशो Ya: 120 |

पण्डिता बहवो राजन्बहुन्ना: संशयच्छिद: | सदसस्पतयोऽप्येके असन्तोषात् पतन्त्यध: 1221

An indigent man should not endeavour to obtain wealth even for the sake of piety or for

maintenance. Effortlessness proves to be a means of subsistence to a man who ceases to
strive (even) as it does in the case of a python. (15) How can that (supreme and lasting)
happiness which falls to the lot of a contented and effortless man delighting in his own self
be enjoyed by one running in all directions in quest of wealth out of greed for objects of
sense?(16) To a man ever contented in mind all directions are full of happiness, (just) as
there is (complete) security from gravel and thorns etc., for him whose feet are protected by
shoes. (17) With what cannot a contented man geton, O Yudhisthira,say, even with water?
It is (only) due to (his) longing for the delights of sex and the palate that a man behaves
(knocks about from door to door) like a dog.(18) The glory, learning, austerity and fame of
a discontented Brahmana disappear and his wisdom gets dissipated due to the vagrancy of
his senses. (19) Aman reaches the end of (is able to conquer) passion through hunger and
thirst, and the end of wrath on the appearance of its sequel (in the shape of violence); but
he fails to reach the end of greed (even) after conquering the (four) quarters and enjoying
the sovereignty of (many) lands. (20) Many a learned man, possessing extensive knowledge
and capable of dispelling (others') doubts, O king, and even some heads of assemblies
descend into depths of hell through discontent. (21)

असङ्कल्पाज्जयेत् कामं क्रोधं कामविवर्जनात्। अर्थानर्थेक्षया लोभं भयं तत्त्वावमर्छानात् । २२॥
आन्वीक्षिक्या छ्ञोकमोहौ दम्भं महदुपासया | योगान्तरायान् मौनेन हिंसां कायाद्यनीहया 1231
कृपया भूतजं दु:खं ea जह्यात् समाधिना। आत्मजं योगवीर्येण fst सत्त्वनिषेवया ex
रजस्तमश्च सत्त्वेन सत्त्वं BU च । एतत् सर्वं गुरौ भक्त्या पुरुषो ह्यञ्जसा जयेत् । २५॥
