Dis. 4] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 23
RA AA AR BA A Pe A rr fe freee be trini Rega
CEL ANN 8B ज् Sr व rt eth ee

Sita began again : Now perceiving extraordinary devotion in the mind of His devotees,
the Lord, who is (so) fond of His devotees, entered the Sinless hearts of His (aforementioned)
devotees, leaving His own realm. He hada garland of sylvan flowers (about His neck), was
dark-brown as a (rainy) cloud, was clad in yellow (silk of exquisite texture), stole the mind of
all (by His extreme comeliness of form), was resplendent with a (shining) girdle and was
adorned with a brilliant diadem and (alligator-shaped) ear-rings. He stood in a lovely pose
with His body slanting at three places, and was decked with the charming Kaustubha (a
diamond-like gem hanging on His breast). He possessed the grace of millions of cupids and
was daubed with heavenly sandal-paste, was an embodiment of supreme bliss and
consciousness, most charming (in aspect), and held a flute (against His lips). (1—4) The
denizens of Vaikuntha as well as those like Uddhava who are devoted to Lord Visnu (here)
were present there under disguised character with the object of listening to the story. (5)
Then (on the appearance of the Lord) shouts of "Glory, Glory (to the Lord)!"and blasts of
conchs were repeatedly heard; there was an unusual abundance of joy and showers of red
powder and flowers (from above). (6) Those present in that assembly forgot (all about) their
body, dwelling and (even) their own self. Perceiving this state of their absorption, Narada
submitted as follows:— (7)

अलौकिकोऽयं महिमा मुनीश्वरा: सप्ताहजन्योऽद्य विलोकितो मया ।

We: wet ये पशुपक्षिणोऽत्र सर्वेऽपि निष्पापतमा भवन्ति । ८ ।

ait नृलोके ननु नास्ति किंचिच्चित्तस्य ster act पवित्रम् ।

अघौघविध्वंसकरं ada कथासमानं yfa नास्ति चान्यत्। ९ ।

के के विशुद्ध्यन्ति वदन्तु ue सप्ताहयज्ञेन कथामयेन |

कृपालुभिर्लोकहितं विचार्यं venir: कोऽपि नवीनमार्ग: 1201

Such transcendent virtue emanating from the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week
has been witnessed by me today, O greatsages ! Eventhose who are ignorant and wicked,
ncluding beasts and birds here, have all become most sinless. (8) Therefore, in the Kali
age there is certainly no other holy act on earth, the region of mortals, as efficacious in
purifying the mind as well as in wiping out the heaps of sin as the story of Srimad
Shagavata. (9) (Pray) tell me what types of individuals get thoroughly purified through a
seven days' Yajfia consisting of an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. Keeping in view the
good of the world an altogether novel method has been brought to light by you,
compassionate as you are. (10)
PAR HY:

ये मानवा: पापकृतस्तु सर्वदा सदा दुराचाररता विमार्गगा: |
क्रोधाग्निदग्धा: कुटिलाश्च कामिन: सप्ताहयज्ञेन कलौ पुनन्ति Fee
सत्येन हीना: पितृमातृदूषकास्तृष्णाकुलाश्चाश्रमधर्मवर्जिता: ।
येदाम्भिकामत्सरिंणोऽपिहिंसका:सप्ताहयज्ञेनक्लीपुनन्तिते।१२।
पञ्चोग्रपापाश्छलछद्मकारिण: क्रूरा: पिशाचा इव निर्दयाश्च ये ।
ब्रह्मस्वपुष्टा व्यभिचारकारिण: सप्ताहयज्ञेन wet पुनन्ति ते ।१३॥
कायेन वाचा मनसापि पातकं नित्यं प्रकुर्वन्ति wer ea ये ।
परस्वपुष्टा मलिना दुराशया: सप्ताहयज्ञेन wet पुनन्ति ते । १४॥
