Dis. 10} BOOK FIVE 477

SHEKEL ASHYHHKASSEEKHKAEH ESRC EHEEKETEELEEREHEE EEE TER EEA He Hee Hee
ज्न्रर्त्त

O pious sage, cannot be penetrated (correctly understood) even with the help of intuition. (18)
Moreover, | was (just) proceeding to ask Lord Kapila—who is no other than Sri Hari,
descended (on earth) with a view to imparting (true) knowledge, nay, who is the Master of
Yoga and the supreme preceptor of sages knowing the truth about the Self—whatis the (true)
asylum in this world. (19) May it be that you are the same Lord Kapila going about incognito
inorder to examine the condition of the world ? How canhe whois tied to his home and whose
intellect is blinded (by infatuation) understand the ways of Masters of Yoga ? (20)

ww: wm: कर्मत आत्मनो 8 भर्तुर्गन्तुर्भवतश्चानुमन्ये।

यथासतोदानयनाद्यभावात् समूल इष्टो व्यवहांरमार्ग.॰ 1221

स्थाल्यग्नितापात्पयसोऽभितापस्तत्तापतस्तण्डुलगर्भरन्धि:

देहेन्द्रियास्वाशवसन्निकर्षात् तत्संसृति: पुरुषस्य|नुरं|ध|त्।२२ ।

शास्ताभिगोप्तां नृपति: wart य: fest a न पिनष्टि पिष्टम्।

स्वधर्ममाराधनमच्युतस्य यदीहमानो विजहात्यघौघम्। 23 |

तन्मे भवान्नरदेवाभिमानमदेन तुच्छीकृतसत्तमस्य।
कृषीष्ट मैत्रीदृशमार्तबन्धो यथा तरे सदवध्यानमंह:।२४॥।

न विक्रिया विश्वसुहृत्सखस्य साम्येन वीताभिमतेस्तवापि।
`महद्विमानात् स्वकृताद्धि mE नड्क्ष्यत्यदूरादपि शूलपाणि:। eu)
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे दशमोऽध्याय:। १० ।

“| have known weariness being felt by me through activity (in the form of fighting in war)
and infer that the same must (likewise) be experienced by you while bearing a load and
walking (with the same). The phenomenal world too ought to have a reality at its bottom; for
otherwise it will have no utility nor will it be possible to take any work from it, any more than
one can fetch water and so onin an unreal jar. (21) (Itis a matter of common experience that)
in consequence of a kettle being heated by fire the water (contained in it) also gets fully
heated and due to the heat of the water the grains of rice (that are being boiled in it) get
softened (first) and (then) their interior too; and the heat thus conducted from the pot to the
water and from the water to the exterior of the grains in the first instance and later on to their
interior as well is not unreal. Even so, due to contact (identification) with the body, as well
as with the Indriyas (the senses of perception and the organs of action) and the mind, their
experiences (in the form of fatigue, the feeling of heat and cold and so on) are (gradually)
transmitted to the soul (as well) because of its taking upon itself the attributes of its
conditioning vestures. (22) (Granted that the relation of master and servant subsisting
between a ruler and his subjects is not permanent or unchangeable) a king is (nevertheless
for the time being) the ruler and protector of the people. He whois a servant (of the Lord, that
is, he who does his duty as a piece of service to the Lord) does not grind what is already
ground (undertake an unprofitable business), for (although he may not be able to rid a dunce
of his stupidity by upbraiding him for his remissness, he thereby carries out the Lord's behests
and) by offering worship to the Lord in the shape of performing his duty he is able to get rid
of his stock of sins. (23) Therefore, may you be pleased, O friend of the afflicted, to cast a
kindly look on me, who have slighted the most holy (like you) through vanity arising from
consciousness of my being a ruler of men, so that | may (be able to) get rid of the sin incurred
by showing disrespect to pious souls. (24) Although there is no agitation in you, who are a
