508 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

RE का ONE ERE ONE I eT eh ee a eH ee ee
eee ee ee ee ES TN ae

“Women (maids) in this world desire (to obtain) another man as a husband by propitiating
Yourself, the very Director of the senses, through sacred vows (of various kinds). They (the
earthly husbands obtained by them) are surely unable to protect the beloved offspring,
wealth and life of these women, since they (the husbands) are anything but independent
(themselves). (19) He alone is a master in the real sense, who has no fear from any quarter
himself and is able to protect on all sides a person stricken with fear. You are the only lord
(answering these qualifications),since You account no other joy higher than the realization
of Your own blissful nature. Otherwise (if Your joy depended on others, You would befar from
independent and in the event of there being a number of independent rulers) there would
be fear from one another. (20) (Again,) she who exclusively desires to adore the lotus-feet
of such a lord in You succeeds in attaining all the objects of her desire (and yet enjoys the
fame of being a disinterested devotee). If, on the other hand, You are worshipped (by a
woman) and approached with a longing to secure from You her sought for boon, You
bestow (on her) that boon alone, with the result that on the said object of her longing being
destroyed (in course of time) she feels much afflicted, O Lord ! (21) (Even) Brahma (the
birthless creator), Lord Siva (the all-powerful), gods (like Indra), demons and the like,
whose mind is attached to the objects of senses, practise severe austerities for winning
me (my grace), but fail to secure me—barring him who is devoted to You—inasmuch as
my heart is fixed on You (alone), O invincible Lord ! (22) Be pleased, O immortal Lord, to
place on my head Your adorable lotus-like hand, which You have (so often) placed on the
head of devotees. (I certainly enjoy Your esteem in that) You bear me by way ofan emblem
(in the form of a golden streak) on Your (blessed) bosom, O adorable one | (Yet | am
deprived of Your grace, which is the exclusive privilege of devotees —an anomaly which
1am unable to understand. This is, however, no cause for wonder; for) who can (hope to)
divine the raison d'etre of whatever is wrought by Your Maya (deluding potency),
omnipotent as You are?” (23)

रम्यके च भगवत: प्रियतमं मात्स्यमवताररूपं तद्वर्षपुरुषस्य मनो: प्राक्प्रदर्शितं स इदानीमपि महता
भक्तियोगेनाराधयतीदं चोदाहरति | २४॥ ॐ AAT भगवते मुख्यतमाय नम: सत्त्वाय प्राणायौजसे सहसे
Aes महामत्स्याय नम इति। 241

And in Ramyakavarsa, the (present) Manu (Sraddhadeva, a son of the sun-god, known
by the name of Satyavrata in the sixth or Caksusa Manvantara) the ruler of that Varsa adores
even now with an unceasing flow of great (exclusive and disinterested) devotion, the most
beloved form of the Lord—the form of the Divine Fish—revealed to him before (at the end
of the Caksusa Manvantara,” when the three worlds were inundated by the ocean), and
repeats the following (prayer):— (24) "Hail to the Lord as revealed in His very first descent
(on the material plane) and denoted by the mystical syllable OM ! Hail to Him who is an
embodiment of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), and who is the very life-giving
principle as well as (the source of) the potency of the Indriyas, the strength of mind and
physical strength (too) !! Hail to the great (divine) Fish !!!" (25)

a ईंश्वरस्त्वं च इदं वशेऽनयन्नाम्ना यथा दारुमयीं नर: स्नियम्। re
यं लोकपाला: किल मत्सरज्वरा हित्वा यतन्तोऽपि पृथक समेत्य च।
पातुं न शेकुरद्दिपदश्चतुष्पद: सरीसूपं स्थाणु aay दृश्र्यते। २७॥
war युगान्तार्णंव ऊर्मिमालिनि क्षोणीमिमामोषधिवीरुधां निधिम्।
मया Wars क्रमतेऽज Beta a जगत्प्राणगणात्मने नम इति। २८

* For the story connected with the Lord's descent as the divine Fish vide Discourse XXIV of Book VIII.
