Dis. 14] BOOK NINE 55

PHRHERA AAV HE SHREK GLCE CLEAN LELLETE NTA E See eet eee tHhhheerernnTehnerrehhehee

मित्रावरुणयो: जापादापन्ना नरलोकताम्।निशम्य पुरुषश्रेष्ठं कन्दर्पमिव रूपिणम्।
धृतिं विष्टभ्य ललना उपतस्थे तदन्तिके 12191
a तां विलोक्य नृपतिर्हर्षेणोत्फुल्ललोचन: | उवाच ङ्लक्ष्णया वाचा देवीं हृष्टतनूरुह: । १८॥

Now, apprised of the (whole) situation by the sage Angira, Brahma (the creator of the
universe) harshly rebuked Soma and had Tara restored to her husband, who perceived her
to be enceinte. (8) (He said to her), "Cast away, cast away at once frommy soil, O evil-minded
one! the seed sown by others. | am not going to bum you a woman, O good lady, anxious
as | am to have children (through you).” (9) Full of shame, Tara brought forth a son effulgent
as gold. The sage Brhaspati (son of Angira) as well as Soma conceived a longing for the
boy.(10) While the two were hotly disputing with regard to the child, each saying, "Itis mine,
not yours!" sages and gods questioned her (as to whose progeny it was). She, however, said
nothing, overcome as she was by shame. (11) Full of wrath the child said to the mother, "Why
do you out of false modesty not speak (the truth), O immoral woman! (Therefore) tell me of
your sin at once.” (12) Calling her aside and reassuring her, Brahma gently interrogated her.
She (then) gradually intimated that the child belonged to Soma, on which Soma took
possession of the child. (13) Brahma (the self-bomn) gave him the name of Budha (the wise
one), in virtue of his profound wisdom, O protector of men! From this son, the moon-god (the
king of the stars) derived (great) joy. (14) Of Budha was born, through Ila, Purdrava, who
has already been referred to.* Smitten with shafts of jove to hear of his personal charm,
excellences, liberality, amiable disposition, affluence and valour, which were being extolled
by the celestial sage (Narada), in the court of Indra (the lord of paradise), the celestial nymph
Urvasi sought his presence. (15-16) Having developed a human disposition, thanks to the
curse of the gods Mitra and Varuna, that charming damsel saw Purirava (the foremost of
men), who was as handsome as Love, and, controlling herself, arrived in his presence. (17)
Seeing that celestial nymph, Pururava spoke to her ina polite language (as follows), his eyes
blooming with delight and the hair of his body standing on end. (18)

स्वागतं ते वरारोहे आस्यतां करवाम किम्।संरमस्व war साकं deat शाश्वती: समा: । १९॥
The king said : | welcome you, 0 charming one, let yourself be (comfortably) seated.
What shall we do for you ? Revel with me here. Let our enjoyment extend over numberless

years. (19)
उर्वरयुवाच
कस्यास्त्वचि न dad मनो दृष्टिंश्च सुन्दर। यदङ्मान्तरमासाद्य च्यवते ह रिरंसया । २०॥
WGA राजन् न्यासौ रक्षस्व मानद | संरंस्येभवता ar cere: Sot वर: स्मृत: ।२१।
ga मे ak wed स्यान्नेक्षे त्वान्यत्र मैथुनात्। विवाससं aq तथेति प्रतिपेदे महामना: 1221
अहो रूपमहो भावो नरलोकविमोहनम्। को न सेवेत मनुजो देवीं त्वां स्वयमागताम् । २३॥
तया स पुरुषश्रेष्ठो mem चथार्हत:।रेमे सुरविहारेषु कामं चैत्ररथादिषु ।२४॥
रममाणस्तवा देव्या पद्मकिञ्जल्कगन्धया । तन्मुखामोदमुषितो मुमुदेऽहर्गणणान् बहून् ।२५॥
अपश्यन्नुर्वलीमिन्द्रो गन्धर्वान् समचोदयत्।उर्वशीरहितं मह्यमास्थानं नातिञ्ञोभते ।२६॥
a ste महारात्रे तमसि प्रत्युपस्थिते। उर्वङ्या उरणौ जह्नुर्न्यस्तौ wah जायया ee!
निश्म्याक्रन्दितॆ देवी पुत्रयोर्नीयमानयो: । हतास्म्यहं कुनाथेन नपुंसा वीरमानिना ।२८॥

* Vide IX. 1. 35.

