580 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

SRR HARA HHH AERA EEAELELCECERAEAE EET HHAEL SHC HHH HATH LECLAA See CHOW AHH Hee

Yamini brought forth moths. (21) Vinata (also called Suparna) bore Garuda, who carries
(on his back) Bhagavan Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) Himself as well as Aruna (who is
thighless*), the charioteer of the sun-god; while Kadri brought forth the numerous
varieties of Nagas (serpent-demons). (22)
कृत्तिकादीनि Aaa: पल्यस्तु भारत। SAO सोऽनपत्यस्तासु यक्ष्मग्रहार्दित: 1231
पुन: प्रसाद्य तं सोम: कला SY क्षये दिता: | श्रृणु नामानि लोकानां मातॄणां शङ्कराणि च । २४॥।
अथ कश्यपपत्नीनां यत्प्रसूतमिदं जगत्। अदितिर्दितिर्दनु: काष्ठा अरिष्टा सुरसा इला । २५1
मुनि: क्रोधवशा drat सुरभि: सरमा तिमि: | तिमेर्यादोगणा आसन् श्वापदा: सरमासुता: 12 |
सुरभेर्महिषागावो ये चान्ये द्विशफा I ताम्राया: इयेनगृध्राद्या मुनेरप्सरसां गणा: 121
दन्दशूकादय: सर्पा राजन् AAMT: । इलाया भूरुहा: AS यातुधानाश्च सौरसा: । २८।
अरिष्टायाश्च गन्धर्वा: काष्ठाया द्विशफेतरा: । सुता दनोरेकषष्टिस्तेषां प्राधानिकान् शृणु ।२९॥
द्विमूर्धा शम्बरोऽरिष्टो हयग्रीवो विभावसु: | अयोमुख: शङ्कुशिरा: स्वर्भानु: कपिलोऽरुण: ।३०॥
पुलोमा वृषपर्वा च एकचक्रोऽनुतापन: | धूम्रकेशो विरूपाक्षो विप्रचिन्तिश्च दुर्जय: 1321
स्वर्भानो: सुप्रभां कन्यामुवाह नमुचि: किल । वृषपर्वणस्तु हार्मिष्ठां ययातिर्नाहुषो बली 1321
aura याश्च चतस्रश्चारुदर्शना: | उपदानवी हयशिरा पुलोमा कालका तथा 1331
उपदानवीं हिरण्याक्ष: क्रतुर्हयशिरां Fal पुलोमां कालकां च द्वे वैश्वानरसुते तु क: । ३४॥
उपयेमेऽथ भगवान् कर्यपो ब्रह्मचोदित: | पालोमा: कालकेयाश्च दानवा युद्धशालिन: 1341
तयो: षष्टिसहस्राणि यज्ञघ्नांस्ते fag: पिता। जघान स्वर्गतो राजन्नेक इन्द्रप्रियङ्कर: 1361
विप्रचित्ति: सिंहिकायां ad चैकमजीजनत् । राहुज्येष्ठं केतुशातं ग्रहत्वे य उपागत: 1301
Again, (the deities presiding over) the (twenty-seven) lunar mansions, Kritikat and so
on, are the wives of Soma (the moon-god), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata) ! Plagued with the
devilish disease of consumption due to the curse of Daksa (who got enraged with his son-
in-law because of his partiality and excessive fondness for one of his twenty-seven wives,
viz., Rohini, and consequent neglect of others) however, the moon-god got no issue by (any
of) them. (23) Propitiating Daksa again, Soma secured (from him the boon of regaining) the
digits (of light) intercepted (from the lunar orb) during the waning (dark) fortnight (but no
issues even then). Now hear the auspicious names of Kasyapa’s wives, the mothers of (all
species of) living beings, by whom (the whole of) this universe was brought forth—{viz..)
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kastha, Arista, Surasa, Ila, Muni, Krodhavasa, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama
and Timi. Of (the last-named,) Timi, were born the (numerous) species of acquatic
creatures; while wild animals (the tiger etc.), are the offspring of Sarama. (24—26) Of
Surabhi were born the buffaloes, the bovine race and whatever other (ruminant) beasts with
cloven hoofs there are, 0 king ! of Tamra, were born the hawk, the vulture and other
(carnivorous) birds; while the hosts of celestial nymphs were born of Muni. (27) Reptiles such
as the snake, O king (Pariksit), are the progeny of Krodhavasa. From (the womb of) lla
appeared the whole vegetable kingdom; while the Raksasas (ogres) are the offspring of
Surasa. (28) The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) are the progeny of Arista, and beasts
with uncloven hoofs (such as the horse and the donkey), of Kastha. The sons of Danu

number sixty-one; hear (ihe names of) the chief of them. (29) They are Dwimurdha,
Sambara, Arista, Hayagriva, Vibhavasu, Ayomukha, Sankusira, Swarbhanu (Rahu), Kapila,

* The tradition goes that the egg that bore Aruna was broken before time and hence Aruna was in an undeveloped
condition without his lower limbs.
१ For the names of the lunar mansions vide foot-note below V.xxii. II.
