Dis. 9] © “BOOK ONE 35
fret tt hte be toe fe WBE Me TE We Re BW By BH BE He YR RE RE RT RR Re RR OR Be ERT ESR A
त्वा त्या ज ञ जा न ज OH GH Hr

to propitiate the Lord, both briefly and in detail. He also explained, 0 Saunaka, the four ends
of human pursuit, viz., Dharma (religious merit), Artha (worldly riches), Kama (sensuous
enjoyment) and Moksa (final beatitude or liberation) as well as the means to them in their
true perspective with the help of many illustrative anecdotes and stories. (26—28) While he
was thus discoursing on Dharma, there arrived the time when the sun changes its course
towards the north—a time which is coveted by Yogis (mystics) who drop their body according
to their pleasure. (29) Thereupon Bhisma (who had led on the battle-field thousands of
warriors) wound up his speech and exclusively fixed his mind, which was s absolutely free from
worldly attachment, as well as his eyes, which knew no winking, on Sri Krsna, the Prime
Person, who was present before him in His four-armed form, clad in shining yellow robes.
(30) The last traces of sin (if any) left in him were obliterated by his concentrated thought on
the Most Holy and the pain which he felt. on account of the weapons (arrows piercing his
body) quickly disappeared at a mere glance of the Lord. Now, while casting off his body, he
stopped all the activities and wanderings of his senses and extolled Lord Janardana (Sri

Krsna). (31)
श्रीभीष्म उवाच
sft मतिरुपकल्पिता वितृष्णा भगवति सात्वतपुङ्खवे विभूम्नि ।
स्वसुखमुपगते क्वचिद्बिहर्तुं प्रकृतिमुपेयुषि यद्भवप्रवाह: 182
वपुरलककुलावृताननाब्जं विजयसखे सरतिरस्तु मेऽनवद्या । ३३॥
युधि तुरगरजोविधूम्रविषुक्कचलुलितश्रमवार्यलङ्कृतास्ये |
मम निशितशारैर्विभिद्यमानत्वचि विलसत्कवचेऽस्तु कृष्ण आत्मा ।३४॥
सपदि सखिवचो निशम्य ma निजपरयोर्बलयो wi far
स्थितवति परसैनिकायुरक्ष्णा हृतवति पार्थसखे रतिर्ममास्तु ।३५॥
व्यवहितपृतनामुखं fie स्वजनवधाद्बिमुखस्य दोषबुद्ध्या |
कुमतिमहरदात्मविद्यया यश्चरणरति:र परमस्य तस्य मेऽस्तु । ३६॥
स्वनिगममपहाय मत्प्रतिज्ञामृतमधिकर्तुमवप्नुतो रथस्थ: ।
धृतरथचरणोऽभ्ययाच्चलदगुर्हरिरिव हन्तुमिभं गतोत्तरीय: 13191
शितविशिखहतो विशीर्णदंश: क्षतजपरिष्रुत आततायिनो मे ।
प्रसभमभिससार मद्बधार्थं स भवतु A भगवान् गतिर्मुकुन्द: । ३८॥
विजयरथकुटुम्ब ana धृतहयरण्मिनि तच्छियेक्षणीये |
भगवति रतिरस्तु मे मुमूर्षोर्यमिह निरीक्ष्य हता गता: सरूपम् । ३९॥
ललितगतिबिलासवल्गुहासप्रणयनिरीक्षणकल्पितोरुमाना: ।
कृतमनुकृतवत्य उन्मदान्धा: प्रकृतिमगन् fees यस्य गोपवध्व: ।४०॥
मुनिगणनृपवर्यसंकुलेऽन्त:सदसि युधिष्ठिरराजसूय एषाम्।
अर्हणमुपपेद ईक्षणीयो मम दृशिगोचर एष आविरात्मा ।४१॥
तमिममहमजं झरीरभाजां हृदि हृदि धिष्ठितमात्मकल्पितानाम् ।
प्रतिदूशामिव नैकधार्कमेकॆ समधिगतोऽस्मि विधूतभेदमोह: ।४२॥।

Bhisma said : Now on the eve of my departure (from this mortal world) | offer my mind,
which is free from all thirst (for worldly enjoyment), to the supreme Lord, Sri Krsna (the
