326 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

PHARAOH HECHT AH SEACH कक त्सि वयैयोजा कौ CEREAL कीत्छीज्डडीती कक EREROHHEE क कज् वयै त्
एवं संजल्पितं मातुराकर्ण्यर्थागमं वच: । संनियम्यात्मनाऽऽत्मानं निश्चक्राम पितु: पुरान् । २४॥
नारदस्तदुपाकर्ण्य ज्ञात्वा तस्य चिकीर्षितम्। स्पृष्टा मूर्धन्यघघ्नेन पाणिना प्राह विस्मित: । २५॥
Sa तेज: क्षत्रियाणां मानभङ्गममृष्यताम्। बालोऽप्ययं हृदा धत्ते यत्समातुरसद्वच: 126!

Maitreya resumed : Hearing the words thus addressed by his mother (Suniti), which
were conducive to the object sought after by him, Dhruva fully controlled his mind by force
of his reason and sallied forth from his father's capital. (24) When Narada heard of this and
learnt what the child intended.to do, he (met him on the way and,) touching the latter's head
with his purifying hand, said (to himself), wondering :— (25) "Oh the spirit of the Ksatriyas,

-who cannot brook insult ! Though yet a child, he has taken to heart the stinging words of his

stepmother !" (26)

ARG उवाच .

नाधुनाप्यवमानं ते सम्मानं वापि पुत्रक । लक्षयाम: कुमारस्य सक्तस्य क्रीडनादिषु । २७॥

विकल्पे विद्यमानेऽपि न ह्यसंतोषहेतव: । पुंसो मोहमृते भिन्ना यल्लोके निजकर्मभि: 1201

परितुष्येत्ततस्तात तावन्मात्रेण पूरुष: । दैवोपसादितं यावद्वीक्ष्येश्चरगति बुध: ।२९॥

अथ मात्रोपदिष्टेन चयोगेनावरुरुत्ससि । यत्प्रसादं स वै पुंसां दुराराध्यो मतो मम 1301

Te: ved ge नि:सङ्गेनोरुजन्मभि: । न विदुर्मृगयन्तोऽपि तीव्रयोगसमाधिना । ३१।

अतो निवर्ततामेष निर्बन्धस्तव निष्फल: । चतिष्यति भवान् काले श्रेयसां समुपस्थिते 1321

यस्य ag दैवविहितं स तेन सुखदु:खयो: । आत्मानं तोषयन्देही तमस: पारमृच्छति 1331

गुणाधिकान्मुदं लिप्सेदनुक्रोशं गुणाधमात्। मेत्रीं समानादन्विच्छेन्न तापैरभिभूयते । ३४॥
Narada said : We do not find anything conducive to your honour or ignominy at this
stage, dear son, a child as you are, fond of play and other things. (27) Even if you have
developed the sense of honour and ignominy, there are no diverse causes of discontent for
a man other than ignorance; for whatever he reaps in the world follows from his own (past)
actions. (28) Seeing the ways of God, therefore, a wise man should rest contented, dearson,
with whatever is placed within his reach by Providence. (29) Besides, He whose grace you
seek to win by means of the discipline taught by your mother is accounted by me as hard
to propitiate. (30) Sages fail to discover His path even though they seek for it with the help
of abstract meditation coupled with rigorous self-discipline (in the form of Devotion etc.,)
carried on in a detached way through numberless births. (31) Therefore, let this futile
pertinacity of yours cease; you may strive (for that end) when the time for practices (such
as Devotion and so on) leading to final beatitude comes. (32) Reconciling oneself to that
which is decreed for that being by Providence in the form of joy or sorrow, an embodied being
reaches the end of darkness (in the shape of mundane existence). (33) A man should be
pleased at the sight of one whois superior in qualities, should have tender feelings towards
one who is inferior in accomplishment and seek friendship with one who is ona par with him;

by doing so a man is never overwhelmed with afflictions. (34)

ध्रुव उवाच
asd शामो भगवता सुखदु:खहतात्मनाम्। दर्शित: कृपया पुंसां दुर्दर्शोऽस्मद्विधैस्तु a: । ३५1
अथापि मेऽविनीतस्य ant घोरमुपेयुष:। सुरुच्या दुर्वचोबाणैर्न भिन्ने saa हृदि ।३६॥
we त्रिभुवनोत्कृष्टं जिगीषो: साधु act मे । ब्रूह्यस्मत्पितृभिर्ब्रह्मन्नन्यैरप्यनधिष्ठितम्_ । ३७1
Ti भवान् भगवतो disse: परमेष्ठिन: । वितुदन्नटते dit fed जगतोऽर्कवत् 3c!
