34 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

ERSCES SOR EERSTREE STEW ESE TRD SE EEREE SE COHAEEEREETE EECEREE AREER ERS E STEN eEERNEEER ET

notion of difference and infatuation, born of the attributes of Maya (modes of Prakrti, viz.,
Rajas and Tamas respectively)? (24) O Lord, letus (therefore, simply) bow to You, the most
ancient Person, in whom the (aforesaid) attributes of Maya (Prakrti), actions prompted by
them as well as bodies engendered by such actions are altogether absent, who have no
(material) name or form, who are entirely free from merit and sin, (yet) who have (by Your
own independent will) assumed (revealed) a (divine) form in order to teach wisdom (to Your
devotees)! (25) In this world evolved by Your Maya (creative will) people revolve (are born
again and again) in the midst of houses and other objects of senses, taking them to be real,
their intellect being deluded by lust, greed, jealousy and infatuation. (26) Today, O Lord, the
(very) Self of all created beings, by your sight (alone) the strong cord of our ignorance (in
the shape of identification with the body and so on)—the root of all craving (for sensuous
enjoyment), as well as of actions (prompted by such craving) and the Indriyas (the
instruments of such actions)—has been cut asunder. (27)
श्रीगुक उवाच
इत्थंगीतानुभावस्तं भगवान् कपिलो मुनि: । अंशुमन्तमुवाचेदमनुगृह्य धिया FT । २८॥

Sti Suka went on : The Divine sage Kapila, whose glory was thus sung (by Prince
Amsuman), mentally blessed the said AmSuman and spoke (to him) as follows, O protector
of men ! (28)

।।

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अश्वोऽयं नीयतां aa पितामहपशुस्तव । इमे च पितरो दग्धा गङ्गाम्भोऽर्हन्ति नेतरत् । २९॥
तं परिक्रम्य शिरसा प्रसाद्य हयमानयत्।सगरस्तेन पशुना क्रतुशेषं समापयत् ।३०॥
राज्यमंशुमति न्यस्य नि:स्पृहो मुक्तबन्धन: । और्वोपदिष्टमार्गेण लेभे गतिमनुत्तमाम् ।३१॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे सगरोपाख्यानेऽष्टमोऽध्याय: ।८।

The glorious Lord replied : This horse, the animal to be sacrificed by your grandfather
(Emperor Sagara), may be taken away (by you), dear child. And these uncles of yours, that
lie burnt (here) stand in need of the water of the (holy) Ganga (for being redeemed) and
nothing else." (29) Walking round Him (from left to right as a mark of respect) and bowing
to Him with his head (bent low), the prince brought (back) the horse. And with that animal
Emperor Sagara concluded the sacrifice, which had remained uncompleted (all these
days).(30) Having entrusted the kingdom to Prince Amguman, Sagara, who was (now) free
from (all) craving and had thrown off his fetters (in the shape of identification with the body
etc.), reached the highest goal (viz., final beatitude) by following the course recommended
by (his preceptor) the sage Aurva. (31)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, hinging on the story of Sagara,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SPENT RTH
IIE ESERIES
