Dis. 18 ] ' «BOOK THREE 215

SHES He EER EE TESTE EAE TETHER STE eee eee Peek

Discourse XVII

Encounter of the Divine Boar with Hiranyaksa
मेत्रेय उवाच
Rider गतिमङ्ग ance रसातलं fafa त्वरान्वित: । १ ।
मुष्णन्तमक्ष्णा स्वरुचोऽरुणश्रिया जहास चाहो वनगोचरो मृग: । २ ।
आहैनमेह्यज्ञ mt faa नो रसौकसां विश्वसृजेयमर्पिता ।
न wht यास्यस्यनया मपेक्षत: सुराधमासादितसूकराकृते । ३ ।

त्वं न: सपत्नैरभवाय fe भृतो चो मायया हन्त्यसुरान् परोक्षजित् ।
at योगमायाबलमल्पपौरुषं संस्थाप्य ye प्रमृजे सुहृच्छुच: । ४ ।
त्वयि dem गदया शीर्णशीर्षण्यस्मद्भुजच्युतया ये च तुभ्यम्।
बलिं हरन्त्यृषयो ये च देवा: wa we न भविष्यन्त्यमूला: । ५ ।
स तुद्यमानोऽरिदुरुक्ततोमरैर्दष्टाग्रगां गामुपलक्ष्य भीताम् |
तोदं मृषन्निरगादम्बुमध्याद् प्राहाहत: सकरेणुर्यथेभ: । ६ ।
a नि:सरन्तं सलिलादनुद्रुतो हिरण्यकेशो fee यथा झष: ।
करालदंष्टोऽशनिनि:स्वनोऽब्रवीद् गतह्रियां fe त्वसतां विगर्हितम् । ७ ।

Maitreya continued ; Hearing the foregoing words of Varuna (the lord of waters), the
proud and vainglorious Daitya paid little heed to them. And having learnt from Narada the
whereabouts of Sri Hari, O dear Vidura, he hurriedly betook himself to the depths of the
ocean. (1) He saw there the all-victorious divine Boar bearing the earth upwards on the ends
of His tusks and robbing the demon of his splendour by His reddish eyes, andlaughed. "Oh! an
amphibious beast !” (2) (Turning to the Lord) he said, "Come on, fool; leave the earth. The
Maker of the universe has entrusted her to us, the dwellers in Rasatala. You cannot escape
unscathed with her before my very eyes, O vile god disguised as a boar! (3) Have you been
reared by our enemies (the gods) for our extermination, as you kill the Asuras by deceptive
methods and conquer them while remaining invisible yourself ? You possess little prowess,
Yogamaya (deception) being your only strength. Therefore, by killing you, O fool, | shall wipe
the tears of my kith and kin. (4) When you fall dead with your skull smashed by the mace
hurled by our arms, the gods and sages who bear offerings to you will cease to be like trees
without roots.” (5) Though being pierced by the shaft-like abusive words of the enemy, the
Lord bore the pain, perceiving the Earth on the ends of His tusks affrighted, and emerged
out of the water like an elephant with his female companion assailed by an alligator. (6) The
Daitya, who had golden hair (on his head) and fearful tusks, gave a chase to the Lord while
He was rising out of the water, even as an alligator would chase an elephant, and, roaring like

thunder, said, "(Are you not ashamed of running away before a challenging adversary ?) Or
there is nothing reproachful for shameless wretches." (7)

a गामुदस्तात्सलिलस्य गोचरे विन्यस्य तस्यामदधात्स्वसत्त्वम्।
