626 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

TOTO क ERO RE ON OOO NENT NEHER मा ककक माशा NEE RODEN TROON TRENT ERE RS NE ६०० ८

understanding achieve perfection. have {all) been carelessly spent, occupied as । have
been with My fruitless endeavours in the cause of (amassing) wealth. What can | possibly
accomplish now, as | have grown old ? (25) Wherefore does a man alive to the evil
repeatedly allow himself to be troubled so much by his futile endeavours for (the acquisition
of) wealth ? To be sure this world stands fully enchanted by the deluding potency of some
(unknown and unseen) agency. (26) What purpose of a man whois (already in the process
of) being devoured by Death could be served by riches or by those that confer wealth (on
him) and what is to be gained (by him) through enjoyments sought after by the world or
those that cater for (such) enjoyments or (for that matter) through actions that are
conducive to rebirth ? (27)

WOR oumeiqe: सर्वदेवमयो हरि: । aa नीतो दशामेर्तां निर्वेदश्चात्मन: ga: ।२८॥
सोऽहं कालावहोषेण जोषयिष्येऽङ्गमात्मन: | अप्रमत्तोऽखिलस्वार्थे यदि स्यात् fg आत्मनि ।२९॥
तत्र मामनुमोदेरन् देवास्रिभुवनेश्वरा: । मुहूर्तेन wee Weare: समसाधयत् ।३०॥
"Surely Lord Sri Hari, who embodies in His person all the gods, by whom | have been
reduced to this predicament, is pleased with me, and (it is through His pleasure alone that)
despondency has come over me, which will serve (me) as a bark (to cross the ocean of
metempsychosis). (28) Complacent of mind and (wide) awake to all my interests, !, who
have (luckily enough) been reduced to such a (pitiable) plight, shall during what (little)
time—if any—is left (at my disposal) attenuate my body (through askesis). (29) Let the
gods who are the rulers of the three worlds (earth, heaven and the intermediate region)
shower their grace on me in the aforesaid state. (1 feel reassured by the thought that)
Khatwanga (an ancient king) attained in no time Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu, which
is a manifestation of Brahma)" (30)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
yar मनसा ह्यावन्त्यो द्विजसत्तम: । उन्मुच्य हृदयग्रन्थीन् at भिक्षुरभून्मुनि: ।३१॥
a owe महीमेतां संयतात्मेन्द्रयानिल: । fend नगसरग्रामानसङ्घोऽलक्षितोऽविदात् ।३२॥
तं चै प्रवयसं भिक्षुमवधूतमसज्जना: । दृष्टा पर्यभवन् भद्र बह्वीभि: परिभूतिभि: ।३३॥
केचित्तिवेणुं जगृहुरेके पात्रं कमण्डलुम्। पीठं चैकेऽक्षसूत्रं च कन्थां चीराणि केचन ।३४॥
प्रदाय च पुनस्तानि दर्शितान्याददुर्मुने:; । अन्नं च भैक्ष्यसम्पन्नं भुञ्जानस्य सरित्तटे 1341
भूत्रयन्ति च पापिष्ठा: ष्ठीवन्त्यस्य च मूर्धनि । यतवाचं वाचयन्ति ताडयन्ति न वक्ति चेत् । ३६॥
तर्जयन्त्यपरे वाग्भि: स्तेनोऽयमिति वादिन: । बध्नन्ति रज्ज्वा तं केचिद् बध्यतां बध्यतामिति । ३७1
क्षिषन्त्येकेऽवजानन्त एष धर्मध्वज: ङाठ: । क्षीणवित्त इमां वृत्तिमग्रहीत् स्वजनोज्झित: ।३८॥
aa owe महासारो धृतिमान् गिरिराडिव । मौनेन ered बकवद् दृढनिश्चय: ।३९॥
इत्येके विहसन्त्येनमेके दुर्वातयन्ति च । तं बबन्धुर्निरुरुधुर्यथा क्रीडनकं द्विजम् ।४०॥
एवं स भौतिकं दु:खं दैविकं दैहिकं च यत्। भोक्तव्यमात्मनो दिष्टं प्राप्तं प्राप्तमबुध्यत ive
परिभूत इमां गाथामगायत नराधमै: | पातयद्धि: स्वधर्मस्थो धृतिमास्थाय सात्विकीम् । ४२॥
The glorious Lord continued ; Having thus resolved in his mind, the Brahmana (the

foremost of the twice-born classes) who belonged to Avanti undid the knots (in the shape of

the ego-sense and the feeling of myness) existing in his heartand turned out to be a peaceful
wscetc subsisting on alms. (Ft) Wit (us mad, senses and breath fully controlled he
