806 ॥ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 17
ROCKO UN SHEER EHEC hE SEANCES RHE TEE HOKE PTH ELT EEE EH EHH PHOT HOP aa
अदितिरुवाच

a यज्ञपुरुषाच्युत तीर्थपाद तीर्थश्रव: श्रवणमङ्गलनामधेय ।
आपन्नलोकवृजिनोपशमोदयाद्य शं न: Helter भगवन्नसि दीननाथ: | ८ |
ay परं वपुरभीष्टमतुल्यलक्ष्मीर्योभूरसा: सकलयोगगुणास्तरिवर्ग: |
Wa च केवलमनन्त भवन्ति तुष्टात्त्वत्तो Wt किमु सपत्नजयादिराशी: । १०॥

Aditi prayed: O Bestower of the fruit of sacrifices, 0 Soul of sacrifices, O immortal, most
ancient and almighty Lord, whose (very) feet enable one to cross the ocean of mundane
existence, (nay,) whose glory (itself) sanctifies the world, whose name is (most) auspicious
to hear and who manifests Himself in order to relieve the distress of those that take refuge
in Him, (pray,) bring happiness to us; for You are the Protector of the distressed.(8) Hail to
You, Sri Hari, the infinite Lord, who for the coming into existence, continuance and
dissolution of the universe assume of Your own accord the Gunas of Maya (wielding infinite
power), (nay,) who constitute the universe (itself) and are established in Your own Self and
in whose being (the darkness of) ignorance stands dispersed by perfect and evershining
wisdom.(9) From You, when You are pleased, O infinite Lord, are got by men the longest life
(the life of Brahma, extending to 31, 10, 40,00,00,00,000 human years), a body of the desired
type, unequalled wealth, (dominion of) heaven, earth and the nether worlds, all the powers
of Yoga, (all) the three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, worldly possessions
and gratification of the senses) as well as immediate perception of the truth, to say nothing
of such (trivial) blessings as the subjugation of enemies.(10)

श्रीगुक उवाच
आदित्यैवं स्तुतो राजन् भगवान् पुष्करेक्षण: । क्षेत्रज्त: सर्वभूतानामिति होवाच भारत । ११।

Sri Suka continued: Thus hymned by Aditi, © king, Lord Visnu (the lotus-eyed One),

the inner Controller of all created beings, actually replied as follows, O scion of Bharata.(11)

4

श्रीभगवानुवाच
देवमातर्भवत्या मे विज्ञातं चिरकाङ्खितम्। यत् सपत्नैर्हतश्रीणां च्यावितानां स्वधामत: 1221
तान्विनिर्जित्य समरे दुर्मदानसुरर्षभान्।प्रतिलब्धजयश्रीभि:३ पुन्रैरिच्छस्युपासितुम् । १३|।

yeas: स्वतनयैर्हतानां युधि विद्विषाम्। frat रुदन्तीरासाद्य द्रष्टुमिच्छसि दु:खिता: । १४॥
आत्मजान्सुसमृद्धांस्त्वं प्रत्याहतवश: श्रिय: । नाकपृष्ठमधिष्ठाय क्रीडतो द्रष्टुमिच्छसि eu
प्रायोऽधुना तेऽसुरयूथनाथा अपारणीया इति देवि a मति: ।
यत्तेऽनुकूलेश्वरविप्रगुप्ता न fam qa ददाति । १६॥
अथाप्युपायो मम देवि चिन्त्य: सन्तोषितस्य व्रतचर्यया ते ।
wat नार्हति गन्तुमन्यथा श्रद्धानुरूपुं फलहेतुकत्वात् । १७॥

waa पुत्रत्वमुपेत्य ते gam गोप्तास्मि मारीचतपस्यधिष्ठित: ec
उपधाव uf भद्रे प्रजापतिमकल्मषम्।मां च भावयती पत्यावेवंरूपमवस्थितम् । १९।

नैतत् परस्मा आख्येयं पृष्टयापि कथंचन। सर्वं सम्पद्यते देवि देवगुह्यं सुसंवृतम् । २०।
The glorious Lord said: O mother of gods, your long-cherished desire is thoroughly
known to Me, which relates to (the welfare of) your sons, whose Wealth has been usurped
