Dis. 17 ] BOOK SIX 631

REREKKHAHEH EHH AHL AAHECHE NTE SOE AH ETE THE AHS OHARA AHA HHH HO HH Ge eee

जटाधरस्तीव्रतपा ब्रह्मवादिसभापति: | अङ्कीकृत्य स्रियं चास्ते गतह्वी: प्राकृतो यथा । ७ ।

प्रायश: प्राकृताश्चापि fet रहसि बिभ्रति। sr महाव्रतधरो बिभर्ति सदसि स्रियम् । ८ |
Citraketu said : Here sits Lord Siva (the Preceptor of the universe) Himself, the chief
figure in this assembly, engaged in expounding (the essence of) righteousness to (all)
embodied beings, yet actually embracing His Consort in open assembly ! (6) Wearing
matted locks and practising severe austerities, nay, the (recognized) head of assemblies of
Brahmavadis (expositors of the Vedas) He sits hugging a woman shamelessly as an
uncultured person ! (7) Even rustics ordinarily embrace a woman only in seclusion, while
this (great) god, who has undertaken solemn religious vows, is clasping His Spouse in an

open assembly ! (8)
श्रीरुक उवाच
भगवानपि तच्छुत्वा प्रहस्यागाधधीर्नृप | तूष्णीं aya सदसि सभ्याश्च तदनुव्रता: । ९ |
इत्यतद्वीर्यविदुषि ब्रुवाणे बह्वशोभनम्। रुषाऽऽह देवी धृष्टाय निर्जितात्माभिमानिने ।॥१०॥

Sri Suka went on : Even on hearing these (critical) remarks, Lord Siva, whose mind is
too deep to be fathomed, heartily laughed, O Pariksit, and kept quiet; and so did the worthies
present in the assembly and devoted to Him. (9) While Citraketu, who was ignorant of Lord
Siva's greatness, was thus uttering much that was unbecoming of Him, Goddess Parvati
spoke in (great) anger to that impudent Vidyadhara, who (apparently) regarded himself as
one that had subdued one's self. (10)

पार्वत्युवाच

अयं किमधुना लोके ज्ञास्ता दण्डधर: प्रभु: | अस्मद्विधानां दुष्टानां निर्लज्जानां च विप्रकृत् । ११।
न वेद धर्म fase पद्मयोनिर्न ब्रह्मपुत्रा भृगुनारदाद्या: |
न बै कुमार: कपिलो मनुश्च ये नो निषेधन्त्यतिवर्तिनं eee
a: क्षत्रबन्धु: परिभूय सूरीन् प्रशास्ति धृष्टस्तदयं हि दण्ड्य: 1231
नायमर्हति वैकुण्ठपादमूलोपसर्पणम् | सम्भावितमति: स्तब्ध: साधुभि: पर्युपासितम् । १४॥
अत: पापीयसीं योनिमासुरीं याहि edi यथेह भूयो महतां न कर्ता पुत्र किल्बिषम् । १५॥
Goddess Parvati said : Is this fellow the (only) lord now ruling over the world and
wielding the rod of punishment and competent to treat with disrespect wicked and
shameless people like us ? (11) Surely neither Brahma (the lotus-born creator) nor the sons
of Brahma—Bhrgu, Narada and so on—nor indeed the sage Sanatkumara, Lord Kapila and
Swayambhuva Manu know (the essence of) righteousness; for they do not prohibit Lord Siva
(the Destroyer of the universe) from violating (the principles of) righteousness. (12) This
fellow surely deserves to be punished inasmuch as he, a vile Ksatriya, is impudent enough
to insult (great) sages (assembled here) and teach Lord Siva (the Preceptor of the universe)
Himself, whose lotus-feet are worthy of being contemplated on by the aforementioned, nay,
who is the most auspicious of the auspicious. (13) This self-conceited and arrogant fellow
is not fit to resort to the soles of feet of Lord Visnu, the very act of approaching which is
esteemed by the virtuous. (14) Hence be reborn in the demoniac species—a most wicked
species—O evil-minded one, so that you may not perpetrate again in this world, such
offence against the exalted souls my son. (15)

SYP उवाच
एवं शप्तश्चित्रकेतुर्विमानादवरुह्य स:। प्रसादयामास so adi Wal नम्रेण भारत ।१६॥

