568 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

PS TEER LL LA ARERR RALE REALE REESE LARA त्यो AAR SESSA SAALESE SEALERS की वयै EOS eS

Self, violent anger gushing forth from the cavity of the heart in his body is able to transcend
the (three) Gunas (the realm of matter). (14) Add no more to the number of trees (already)
burnt, helpless as they are, and let the surviving ones enjoy your protection. Let this excellent
maid (Marisa by name), brought up by the trees (as their own daughter), be accepted as a
wife (by you)." (15)
Sa वरारोहां कन्यामाप्सरसीं qa सोमो राजा ययौ दत्त्वा ते धर्मेणोपयेमिरे ।१६॥
तेभ्यस्तस्यां समभवद्दक्ष प्राचेतस: किल । यस्य प्रजाविसर्गेण लोका आपूरितास्त्रय: ive

यथा wat भूतानि दक्षो दुहितृवत्सल:। रेतसा मनसा wa तन्ममावहित: yy । १८।
Having thus pacified the Pracetas and handed over (to them) the beautiful daughter of
Pramloca (a celestial nymph), king Soma (the moon-god) returned (to his abode) and the
Pracetas wedded her consistently with virtue (as this union, though forbidden by the Sastras as
falling under the category of polyandry, had been permitted by the Lord—vide IV. xxx. 15-16—and
had thus been more than legalized). (16) From their loins through her was sprung Daksa, the
Pracetasa (son of the Pracetas, as distinguished from his previous incarnation, which owed
its existence to Brahma himself), by whose progeny* and their descendants all the three
worlds were filled on all sides. (17) (Now) hear from me attentively how Daksa, who was
(extremely) fond of his daughters, procreated beings (both) by his mind (sheer force of will)
and by seed. (18)
: | प्रजापतिरिमा: प्रजा: | देवासुरमनुष्यादीन्नभ:स्थलजलौकस: ।१९॥
तमबृंहितमालोक्य प्रजासर्गं प्रजापति: | विन्ध्यपादानुपव्रज्य सोऽचरद दुष्करं तप: 1201
तत्राघमर्षणं नाम तीर्थं पापहरं परम्। उपस्पृरयानुसवनं तपसातोषयद्धरिम् 128
अस्तोषीद्धसगुह्येन भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् | तुभ्यं तदभिधास्यामि कस्यातुष्यद् यतो हरि: 1221
Daksa (a lord of creation) procreated these beings, dwelling in the air, on land and in
water—gods, demons, human beings and so on—by his mind (thought-projection) alone in
the first instance (to begin with). (19) Seeing the procreation of his race not multiplying, the
said Prajapati (Daksa) proceeded to the hills adjoining the Vindhya mountain and practised
austerities (that were) hard to perform. (20) Bathing there thrice a day (in the morning and
evening and at midday) in the holy lake called Aghamarsana (that which washes off one's
sins), which was supremely efficacious in destroying one's sins (as could be expected from
its very name), he propitiated Sri Hari through (his) asceticism. (21) He extolled the Lord,
who is beyond sense-perception, by means of (the hymn called) Harmsaguhya. | shall (now)
repeat to you that hymn through which Sri Hari was pleased with Daksa. (22)

प्रजापतिरुवाच
नम: परायावितथानुभूतये गुणत्रयाभासनिमित्तबन्धवे ।
अदृष्टधाम्ने गुणतत्त्वबुद्धिभिर्निवृत्तमानाय दधे स्वयम्भुव्रे । २३|
न यस्य सख्यं पुरुषोऽवैति सख्यु: सखा वसन् संवसत: पुरेऽस्मिन्।
गुणो यथा गुणिनो व्यक्तदृष्टेस्तस्मै महेशाय नमस्करोमि । २४।

* Itshould be noted here that while this Daksa was bornin the very firstor Swayambhuva Manvantara of the present Kalpa
(round of creation), he begot offspring only in the sixth (Caksusa) Manvantara, i.e., after a period of five Manvantaras—vide
IV. xxx. 49. Thus it will appear that he devoted this inconceivably long period of his life in austerities as a Preparation for his
momentous role of creation and in order to regain the extraordinary and surpassing splendour and eminence acquired by him
in his previous incarnation.
