538 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 6

CC CER HOE ON DEORE REE सा एकक ON KOE BEES COT ENE ET स्ना ११64 KHE TEEN 4४6 १ १०७

adored the sons of Jayanti, the (nine) sages (mentioned before). (43) Then those accom-
plished sages vanished out of sight while all the people stood looking on. Following the
aforesaid courses of conduct, the king attained to the highest goal. (44) O Vasudeva (the best
among fortunate persons)! following these righteous courses pleasing to the Lord, which you
have (just) heard of, full of faith and free from attachment, you too will attain the highest
goal.(45) The fame of you both, husband and wife, really fills the (whole) world because the
almighty Lord Sri Hari has chosen to be your son. (46) Cherishing parental love for Sri
Krsna, you have both purified your soul by His sight, embrace and conversation with Him,
as well as by sitting, sleeping and eating with Him. (47) When (even) Sisupala, Paundraka,
Salva and other kings, thinking of*Him with the feeling of enmity while sleeping, sitting or
eating, had His gait, graceful movements and glances etc., imprinted on their mind and
(accordingly) attained similarity to His form, what to say of those whose mind is attached
to Him. (48) Sri Krsna is the Universal Soul, the almighty Lord, though He has concealed
His divinity by assuming a human personality as a matter of sport; He is above and beyond
all and is immortal. You should not look upon Him as your son. (49) To destroy the devilish
kings who had become a burden to the earth, and to protect the virtuous, Sn Krsna has
appeared on earth. Itis for the liberation of all men that He spreads His fame throughout

the world. (50) a
AYA उवाच
एतच्छुत्वा महाभागो वसुदेवोऽतिविस्मित: । देवकी च महाभागा जहतुर्मोहमात्मन: 1421
इतिहासमिमं पुण्यं धारयेद् य: समाहित: । स विधूयेह wae ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते 142!

Sri Suka continued: Hearing this. the highly fortunate Vasudeva and Devaki felt much
astonished and they overcame their infatuation (ceased to look upon Sri Krsna as a mortal
or their son). (51) Whoever with a concentrated mind retains in his memory this sacred story
shakes off his delusion during his life-time and becomes qualified for attaining oneness with
Brahma (after death). (52)

Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhila.

सि
DOD EEL ILI

अथ षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse Vi
The gods entreat the Lord to return to His divine realm and Uddhava

approaches Him on the eve of the Yadus' departure for Prabhasa
श्रीरुक sara

अथ ब्रह्माऽत्मजैर्देवै: प्रजेशैरावृतोऽभ्यगात्। wag भूतभव्येञशो ययौ भूतगणैर्वृत: । १ ।

इन्द्रो मरुद्धिर्भगवानादित्या वसवोऽश्विनौ i ॠऋभवोऽङ्निरसो रुद्रा fad साध्याश्च देवता: । २ ।

गन्धर्वाप्सरसो «arm: सिद्धचारणगुह्यका:। ॠषय: पितरश्चैव सविद्याधरकिन्नरा: । ३ ।
