30 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

EEFeEH EHC eeROeee te heehee ereerwesansrtereeeerek न 33 न 3333 ^२२०२२२ २२१२ ॥

sacred." (13) (On the child having teethed again) the god of water (appeared and) said once
more, "The teeth have grown again, (please) sacrifice the child (now).” Thereupon
Harigcandra replied, “A prospective victim belonging to the Ksatriya race is (recognized as)
sacred (fit to be sacrificed) only when he is able to put on his armour, O lord !” (14) In this
way the god (of water) waited for the time he was asked to wait by Hari$candra, whose mind
was bound with ties of affection and who was gaining time due to love for his son. (15) Having
come to know of the aforesaid sacrifice intended tobe performed by hisfather (Hari$candra),
Rohita (who had now grown in years as well as in understanding) betook himself to the
woods) bow in hand, anxious to save his life. (16) Hearing that, visited by (angry) Varuna (the
god of water), his father had developed the disease of dropsy, Rohita was about to return
to his home when Indra stopped him (saying that he would certainly be sacrificed to Varuna
if he returned home). (17) Indra (further) counselled Rohita to undertake a holy tour over the
earth by visiting sacred lakes and rivers and other places of pilgrimage (in order to atone
for the offence of his father against Varuna and thereby rid him of his malady) and Rohita
too (accordingly) tarried in the forest for a year (going from place to place as advised by
Indra). (18) Likewise during the second, third, fourth and fifth years as well indra (the slayer
of the demon Vitra) came to him, disguised as an aged Brahmana, and repeated the same
advice. (19) Having roamed about in the woods during the sixth year (as well), Rohita
purchased from Ajigarta (a descendant of the celebrated sage Bhrgu) his middle (second)
son, Sunahgepa (by name), while returning to the city (in order to see his father); and,
handing him over to Harigcandra (his own father) as a (prospective) victim (to be sacrificed
to Varuna) bowed low to him (his father). Thereupon the highly-renowned Harigcandra,
whose stories were sung by the great, propitiated Varuna (the god of water) and the other
gods by means of ahuman sacrifice and was (consequenily) relieved of his dropsy (stomach
disease). At that sacrifice the sage Viswamitra officiated as the Hota; the sage Jamadagni,
who had (duly) controlled his mind, as the Adhwaryu, the sage Vasistha as the Brahma and
the sage Agastya as the Udgata* (the chanter of Samaveda). Pleased with him, Indra give
him a chariot of gold. (20—23)

Be माहात्म्यमुपरिष्टात् प्रचक्ष्यते । सत्यसारां धृतिं gn सभार्यस्य च भूपते: ।२४॥

विश्वामित्रो yet प्रीतो ददावविहतां गतिम् । मन: पृथिव्यां तामद्धिस्तेजसापोऽनिलेन तत् । २५1

खे ag धारयंस्तच्च भूतादौ तं महात्मनि । तस्मिन् ज्ञानकलां ध्यात्वा तयाज्ञानं विनिर्दहन् 126 |

feat at Sa भावेन निर्वाणसुखसंविदा । अनिर्देश्याप्रतर्क्यण तस्थौ विध्वस्तबन्धन: 1201
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायाँ नवमस्कन्थॆ हरिश्चन्दरोपाख्यानं नाम सप्तमोऽध्याय: ॥७1

The glory of Sunahsepa (who was not eventually sacrificed but attained liberation during
his very lifetime) will be recounted later (in connection with the story of Viswamitra’s son)T
And highly gratified to perceive (on another occasion) the firmness of the king (HariScandra)
as well as of his wife (Saibya)¢—firmness which derived its strength from his veracity—the
sage Vigwamitra vouchsafed to him (as a boon) unobstructed knowledge (of the Self).
(Mentally) merging his mind (which is said to be a modification of the foods that one takes)
in earth (the source of all food), he identified the earth with water, water with fire and the latter

Ean
* For the respective function of these priests vide foot-note below I.v.19.
t+ Vide discoures XIV below.
क Vide foot-note below verse 7 above.
+The Sruti says: अत्रमयं fe सौम्य मव:`।
