Dis. 14} ATABOOK-ONE 57

RRA AT Be Re He RR RT BE AA RE HR CREAT HG 3३ ३.३८३:.३.३.३. ३६ ६..३..३..७.६.३.३.३.६.३..६.३.६.3.३...९.६.३.६.३.३.३.६.३.७.६.७..३.३...३.६.७.७.७.६.६.३.५.७.७..३७..६.६..७.३.३.॥
ज्न्र

figure of a monkey) returned from Dwaraka (the capital of the Yadus). (22) Seeing his
younger brother fallen at his feet with a strange look about him, lacklustre and ill at ease, his
face cast down and tears trickling down from his lotus-like eyes, the king felt anxious at heart
and questioned him in the midst of his other kinsmen, recalling the words of Narada. (23-24)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
कच्चिदानर्तपुर्यां न: स्वजना: सुखमासते। मधुभोजदशार्हार्हसात्वतान्धकवृष्णय: ।२५॥
शूरो मातामह: कच्चित्स्वस्त्यास्ते वाथ मारिष: । मातुल: सानुज: कच्चित्कुशाल्यानकदुन्दुभि: । २६॥
ag स्वसारस्तत्पत्न्यो मातुलान्य: सहात्मजा: | आसते सस्नुषा: क्षेम देबकीप्नमुंखा: स्वयम् । 2191
कच्चिद्राजाऽऽहुको जीवत्यसत्पुत्रोऽस्य चानुज: । हृदीक: ससुतोऽक्रूरो जयन्तगदसारणा: 1221
आसते gas aa च ङान्रुजिदादय: | कच्चिदास्ते सुखं Wa भगव्रान् सात्वतां प्रभु: 1281
प्रद्युम्न सर्ववृष्णीनां सुखमास्ते महारथ:। गम्भीररयोऽनिरुद्धो वर्धते भगवानुत igo!
सुषेणश्चारुदेष्णश्च साम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत:। अन्ये च कारष्णिप्रवरा: सपुत्रा ऋषभादय: 1381
wage: wt श्रुतदेवोद्ध्वादय: । सुनन्दनन्दशीर्षण्या ये चान्ये सात्वतर्षभा: 1321
अपि स्वस्त्यासते ad रामकृष्णभुजाश्रया:। अपि स्मरन्ति कुशालमस्माकं बद्धसौहृदा: 1331
Yudhisthira said : "Are our relations, the Madhus, the Bhojas, the Dasarhas, the Arhas,
the Satvatas, the Andhakas and the Vrsnis, happy in Dwaraka (the capital of the Anartas)?(25)
Is my revered maternal grandfather, Sura (Sdrasena) doing well ? And are our maternal
uncles, Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) and his younger brother, enjoying good health ? (26)
Again, are our maternal aunts, the seven wives of Vasudeva, Devaki and others, who are
related to one another as sisters, quite hale themselves as also their sons and daughters-
in-law ? (27) Does king Ahuka (Ugrasena, the father of Devaki), whose son (Kamsa) was
notorious for his wickedness, and his younger brother (Devaka), still alive ? And are Hrdika
and his son (Krtavarma), AkrUura (a cousin of Vasudeva), Jayanta, Gada and Sarana (Sri
Krsna's brothers) as well as Satrujit and others faring well ? And is the divine Sri Rama
(Balarama), the Lord of the Satvatas (Yadavas), happy ? (28-29) Is Pradyumna (Sri Krsna’s
eldest son), the greatest warrior among all the Vrsnis, well ? And is the divine Aniruddha
(Pradyumna’'s son) of marvellous dash ( on the field of battle) prospering ? (30) Susena and
Carudesna (two of the ten sons of Rukmini, of whom Pradyumna was the eldest) and Samba
born of Jambavati, and all the other great sons of Sri Krsna, including Rsabha, as also their
sons, and even so Srutadeva, Uddhava and the other attendants of Sri Krsna and other
principle Satvatas (Yadavas)—Sunanda and Nanda being the chief of them—are all these
doing well, protected by the arms of Sri Rama and Sri Krsna ? Do they ever enquire after our
welfare, bound as they are by ties of affection to us ? (31—33)

भगवानपि गोविन्दो ब्रह्मण्यो भक्तवत्सल: । कच्चित्पुरे सुधर्मायां सुखमास्ते Yecaa: । ३४॥
मङ्गलाय च लोकानां क्षेमाय च भवाय च | आस्ते यदुकुलाम्भोधावाद्योऽनन्तसख: पुमान् । ३५॥
यद्बाहुदण्डगुप्तायां स्वपुर्यां यदवोऽर्चिता: । क्रीडन्ति परमानन्दं महापौरुषिका इव 128
यत्पादशुश्रूषणमुख्यकर्मणा सत्यादयो द्वयष्टसहस्रयोषित: |
निर्जित्य de त्रिदशांस्तदाशिषो हरन्ति वज्रायुधवल्लभोचिता: 301
यद्बाहुदण्डाभ्युदयानुजीविनो यदुप्रवीरा ह्यकुतोभया मुहु: ।
अधिक्रमन्त्यङ्ध्रिभिराहतां बलात् सभां सुधर्मां सुरसत्तमोचिताम् i3ci .
"And is Lord Govinda (Sti Krsna), a friend of the Brahmanas and full of affection for His

devotees, happy in His famous council-chamber, Sudharma, at His own capital, in the midst
of His kith and kin ? (34) Itis for the protection and prosperity and well-being of all the worlds
