508 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 89

ङय व ANA न न्नाक RS ROHR # 9999 9० RT ENSENREKAE NNER NNER EME KHEK ARE ८ EN REE १०० ७

द्विजात्मजा मे युवयोर्दिदृक्षुणा मयोपनीता भुवि धर्मगुप्तये ।
कलावतीर्णाववनेर्भरासुरान् हत्वेह भूयस्त्वरयेतमन्ति मे ।५९॥
पूर्णकामावपि युवाँ नरनारायणावृषी । धर्ममाचस्तां स्थित्यै aed लोकसंग्रहम् । ६०॥

Thus consoling Arjuna, the almighty Lord, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, took Arjuna with Him and,
mounting His divine chariot, proceeded towards the west.(47) Crossing the seven Dwipas,
each containing seven mountain ranges, the seven oceans (dividing those Dwipas from one
another) and the Lokaloka mountain (situated beyond them all), He entered the region of
thick darkness. (48) Pariksit! His (celestial) horses—Saibya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa and
Balahaka—lost their way in that darkness (and could not proceed further). (49) Seeing them
in that plight, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the Lord of all great masters of Yoga, sent ahead of Him
(as a guide) His discus (Sudarsana), which shone like a thousand suns (put together). (50)
Quick as thought, Sudargana made its way through that extensive thick and most terrible
darkness created by the Lord Himself, piercing it by its enormous light. It appeared (at that
time) like a shaft discharged from the bow string of Sri Rama penetrating the armies of
Raksasas. (51) Following the path made by Sudargana, the chariot reached the end of the
region of darkness. Beyond it shone the region of supreme, infinite and all-pervading Light.
Dazed by that light, Arjuna had to shut both his eyes. (52) Crossing the region of light, the
divine chariot entered the region of (supramundane) water, which looked most beautiful
because of its huge waves created by a strong wind (which was blowing at that time). A
wonderful and most luminous palace shining with thousands of columns of brilliant jewels
appeared before them there. (53) Bhagavan Sesa, most terrible ahd wonderful to look at,
was present there. Possessed ofa thousand hoods, each radiant with many jewels on its top
and two fearful eyes, He shone brightly like the white Kailasa mountain, and was blue at the
neck and endowed with blue tongues. (54) (Pariksit! there) Arjuna saw the most exalted
Supreme Person, the all-pervading Lord of infinite powers, reposing on Sesa, making the
coils of the latter His comfortable bed. His Form resembled in colour a cloud surcharged with
humidity. He was clad in bright yellow, and His cheerful countenance and big eyes looked
(most) charming. (55) The tustre of the ear-rings and of the crown on His head, containing
many precious jewels, lighted up His profuse curly locks. He possessed eight longandlovely
arms; the Kaustubha gem shone at His neck; His chest bore the mark of Srivatsa, and the
garland of sylvan flowers hung up to His knees. (56) (Pariksit!) Arjuna saw that the Lord's
attendants like Nanda and Sunanda, His discus (Sudargana) and other weapons endowed
with personal forms, His four Potencies viz., Pusti (Grace), Sri (Splendour), Kirti (Fame) and
Maya, and all the fortunes waited on Him, who is the Lord of Brahma and the other Rulers
of the world. (57) (Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna bowed to the infinite Lord, who was but
Himself in another form. Arjuna was (somewhat) filled with awe at His sight: (but following
Sri Krsna) he too bowed to Him and both of them stood (there) with joined palms. (Now) with
a smile on His lips, and in a deep and sonorous voice the Perfect Person, who is the Lord
of Brahma and other protectors of the world, said to them. (58) "(O Sri Krsna, O Arjuna),
desirous of seeing You both, | had the sons of the Brahmana brought here. You have both
appeared on earth with Your part manifestations for the vindication of virtue. Killing the
Asuras, who have become a burden to the earth, soon return to Me. (59) You are the sages
Nara and Narayana. Though sated in everyway and foremost of all, follow the path of virtue
for maintaining the world order by setting an example before men." (60)

इत्यादिष्टौ भगवता तौ कृष्णौ परमेष्ठिना। ओमित्यानम्य भूमानमादाय द्विजदारकान् । ६१1
न्यवर्ततां स्वकं धाम सम्प्रहष्टौ यथागतम्। विप्राय ददतु: पुत्रान् यथारूपं यथावय: । ६२॥

