Dis. 23 ] BOOK EIGHT 831

HAHAHA AAAEHHRAAH HEHE SEHK HEURES व के छैत्त द्ये HEATER HAAHEK EEA AEA HEE EH HAE RHI

by Him, withdrew to the subterranean world along with Bali. (11-12) Thereupon Lord Visnu
(who takes away the sins of His devotees and) who has His abode in water, O king, spoke
(as follows) to the sage Ugana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of Bali), sitting near at hand in the
midst of (other) priests in the assembly of seers (exponents of the Veda):— (13) "O (holy)
Brahmana, (please) accomplish whatever has been left incomplete by your disciple while
performing the ritual (sacrifice). (For) whatever is found lacking in rituals is made up (even)
when noticed by a Brahmana (and much more when it is actually completed by a

Brahmana).” (14)
Uh sara

कुतस्तत्कर्मवैषम्यं यस्य कर्मेश्वरो भवान्।यज्ञेशो यज्ञपुरुष: सर्वभावेन पूजित: ।१५॥
मन्त्रतस्तन्त्रतर्छिद्रं देशकालार्हवस्तुत: । सर्वं करोति et नामसंकीर्तनं तव । १६।
तथापि वदतो भूमन् करिष्याम्यनुशासनम्।एतच्छय: परं पुंसां यत् तवाज्ञानुपालनम् । १७॥

Sukra replied : How could there be any defect in the sacrificial performance of one by
whom You, the Prompter of (all) actions and the Lord (the Bestower of the fruit) of sacrifices,
nay, the deity presiding over sacrifices, have been propitiated with all his substance (in all
devotion)? (15) The very chanting of Your Name neutralizes all defects relating to (the correct
intonation of) Mantras (sacred texts employed in a sacrifice), procedure, time and place (of
sacrifices) as well as those relating to (the qualifications of) the priests (officiating at the
sacrifice or receiving gifts on that occasion) or the material (or money) used. (16) Neverthe-
less, since it is You who aré saying so, O infinite Lord, | shall do Your bidding. (For) to obey
Your command—this constitutes the highest good of men. (17)

श्रीगुक उवाच

aera हरेराज्ञामुशना भगवानिति । यज्ञच्छिद्रं समाधत्त बलेर्विप्र्षिभि: सह । १८1

एवं बलेर्महीं राजन् भिक्षित्वा वामनो हरि: । ददौ wa nes त्रिदिवं यत् परैर्हृतम् । १९

प्रजापतिपतिर्ब्रह्मा देवर्षिपितृभूमिपै: । दक्षभृग्वङ्निरोमुख्यै:; कुमारेण भवेन च । २०।

कश्यपस्यादिते:; प्रीत्यै सर्वभूतभवाय च । लोकानां लोकपालानामकरोद वामनं पतिम् । २१।

वेदानां सर्वदेवानां धर्मस्य यशास: श्रिय: । मङ्गलानां व्रतानां च कल्पं स्वर्गापवर्गयो: 1221

wg कल्पयाञ्चक्रे पति सर्वविभूतये। तदा सर्वाणि भूतानि yet मुमुदिरे नृप 1231

adhere: पुरस्कृत्य देवयानेन वामनम्।लोकपालैर्दिवं निन्ये ब्रह्मणा चानुमोदित: । २४॥

प्राप्य त्रिभुवनं चेन्द्र उपेन्द्रभुजपालित:। frat परमया जुष्टो मुमुदे गतसाध्वस: 1241

ब्रह्मा Wa: कुमारश्च warn मुनयो zai पितर: सर्वभूतानि सिद्धा वैमानिकाश्च ये ।२६॥

सुमहत् कर्म ae विष्णोर्गायन्त: परमाद्भुतम्।धिष्ण्यानि स्वानि ते जग्मुरदितिं च शंसिरे 1201
Sri Suka continued : Gladly accepting in these words the behest of Sri Hari, the glorious
sage USsana with the help of other Brahmana sages accomplished what was wanting in the
sacrificial performance of Bali. (18) Having thus begged the earth (as well as heaven), that
had been usurped by his enemies (the demons), Lord Sri Hari, disguised as a dwarf, gave
them (back) to His (elder) brother, the mighty Indra. (19) For the gratification of the sage
Kasyapa and Aditi (his wife) as well as for the welfare of all created beings Brahma, the lord
of Prajapatis, together with the gods, seers, manes and the Manus (the protector of the earth)
as well as with Daksa, Bhrgu, Angira and others, the sage Sanatkumara and Lord Siva (the
Source of the universe) made the divine Dwarf the (suzerain) Lord of (all) the worlds and their

guardians.(20-21) (Nay,) for the prosperity of all he further made Lord Vamana (the younger
Brother of Indra), the custodian of the Vedas as well as of all the gods, of righteousness,
