Dis. 6] BOOK FOUR ` `-- 313

Bra Re kt Be PR PO A BRT SB ED BE HK HTT EH FR A Be PHY Be RE A Br Oa Mr eR ey

thigh and the left arm on the left knee * and with a rosary of Aksa seeds coiled round His
(right) wrist, He sat with His right hand formed into what is known as the Tarkamudra t
(generally adopted by those teaching wisdom to their disciples). (38) With their palms joined
in prayer the sages as well as the protectors of the world bowed low to Lord Siva—the Sage
ranking foremost among those given to contemplation—who sat absorbed in the joy of
oneness with the Absolute and leaning on a wooden support generally used by Yogis. (39)
Seeing Brahma (the self-born) arrived (there), Lord Siva, whose feet are reverenced by the
lords of immortals as well as by Asura chiefs, rose (from His seat) and greeted him by bowing
His head, even as the most adorable Lord Visnu (appearing in the form of the divine Dwarf)
bows to Kasyapa (His father and a lord of created beings). (40) So also the hosts of other
Siddhas as well as the great sages, who were devoted to Lord Siva and sat around Him,
bowed to him. Greeted (by them all), Brahma (the self-born) smilingly addressed Lord Siva
(who wears the crescent moon on His head and) who was still bowing to him. (41)

.

ब्रह्मावाच
जाने त्वामीशं fare जगतो योनिबीजयो: arp: शिवस्य च परं यत्तद्ब्रह्म निरन्तरम् ।॥४२॥
त्वमेव भगवन्नेतच्छिवहक्त्यो॥ wend: | fad सृजसि पास्यत्सि क्रीडन्नूर्णपटो यथा ।४३॥
त्वमेव धर्मार्थदुघाभिपत्तये im सूत्रेण ससर्जिथाध्वरम्।
waa लोकेऽवसिताश्च सेतवो यान्ब्राह्मणा: श्रद्दधते धृतव्रता: ।४४॥
त्वं कर्मणां मङ्गलमङ्गलानां कर्तु: स्म लोकं तनुषे स्व: परं वा ।
अमङ्गलानां च तमिस्रमुल्बणं विपर्यय: aa तदेव कस्यचित्।४५॥

Brahma said : | know You to be the Ruler of the universe; for You are the same as the
undifferentiated Brahma, the cause of both Sakti (the Divine Energy or Prakrti) and Siva (the
Spirit or Purusa), who are severally the womb (source) and seed of the creation. (42)
Carrying on Your sportthrough Siva and Sakti, who are essentially one, O Lord, itis You who
create, protect and swailow ( withdraw into Yourseif) this universe, even as the spider
evolves (from its mouth) the cobweb, preserves it and then takes it back into its mouth. (43)
Itis You who evolved the (institution of) sacrifice through the instrumentality of Daksa for the
preservation of the three Vedas (which yield both religious merit and wealth); and by You
have been fixed the bounds of propriety which the Brahmanas who have adopted sacred
vows duly respect. (44) O blissful Lord, You confer (the enjoyments of) heaven or even final
beatitude on him who performs benevolent deeds, and assign the frightful inferno to the
perpetrator of evil deeds. But how is it that in the case of some individuals the fruit of certain
acts is quite the contrary ? (45)

न 8 सतां त्वच्चरणार्पितात्मनां भूतेषु सर्वेष्भिपश्यतां तव ।
भूतानि चात्मन्यपृथग्दिदृक्षतां प्रायेण रोषोऽभिभवेद्यथा पञशुम् ।४६॥
gafer: कर्मदृशो दुराशया: परोदयेनार्पितहद्गुजोऽनिराम् ।
परान् दुरुक्तैर्वितुदन्त्यरुन्तुदास्तान्मा वधीद्दैववधान् भवद्बिध: iviol
यस्मिन् चदा पुष्करनाभमायया दुरन्तया स्पृष्टधिय: पृथग्दृश: |
* This ears is referred to under ther name of 'Virdsana’ in works on Yoga, as the following verse will show ;
+t The il oe more re populaiy ne as the aBecas wes, has been described as follows :—
weiageara re: wares SIRS: । प्रसार्यं बन्धनं प्राहुस्तकंमुद्रेति मान्त्रिका:॥

“Joining the tips of the thumb and the Index finger and straightening the other fingers after joining them together—this
position of the hand is what the knowers of Mantras call “Tarkamudra.”
