688 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

OREM SERENE REE ERE ROTOR HRI RE MO TRA EHS HH EEL RE OCI TE NOR RE EE MERE RMR A RR CREME

नैष त्वया waste वधमर्हति सर्पराट्। अनेन पीतममृतमथ वा अजरामर: । २४॥
Sift मरणे जन्तोर्गति: स्वेनैव कर्मणा । राजंस्ततोऽन्यो नान्यस्य प्रदाता सुखदु:खयो: 1241
सर्पचौराग्निविद्युद्भ्य:  क्षुत्तृड्व्याध्यादिभिर्नृप । पञ्चत्वमृच्छते जन्तुर्भुङ्क्त आरब्धकर्म तत् 1२६॥
Tend, सत्रमिदं राजन् संस्थीयेताभिचारिकम् । aot अनागसो दग्धा जनैर्दिष्टं fe भुज्यते ee!

Enraged to hear of his father having been consumed by Taksaka, Janamejaya with the
help of Brahmana priests started in the course of a sacrifice offering snakes in the prescribed
manner into the sacrificial fire. (16) Agitated with fear to see great serpents burning in blazing
fire at the snake-sacrifice, Taksaka sought (the presence of) Indra for protection. (17) Not
seeing Taksaka there, King Janamejaya (son of Pariksit) inquired of the Brahmanas as to
why Taksaka, the vilest of all snakes, was not being burnt. (18) (They replied,) "Indra, O ruler
of kings, protects him as the latter has sought him for protection. The snake has been held
back by Indra, hence he does not fall into the fire." (19) Hearing this, Janamejaya (son of
Pariksit), highly intelligent as he was, said to the priests, "Why should Taksaka not be invoked
by you, O Brahmanas, alongwith Indra to fall into the sacrificial fire ?” (20) Hearing this the
Brahmanas invoked (the presence of) Taksaka alongwith Indra in the sacrifice thus:
"Taksaka ! soon fall down here with Indra, who has the (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods) for
his followers.” (21) Indra alongwith his aenal car, Taksaka and all, was made to move from
his abode by the maledictions uttered by the Brahmanas and felt greatly agitated in mind.(22)
Brhaspati, the son of Angira, expostulated (thus) with the said king (Janamejaya) when he
saw Indra falling from the heavens alongwith Taksaka and the celestial car:—(23) “This king
of serpents cannot be killed by you, O ruler of men; for he has drunk of nectar and is therefore
unquestionably immortal and immune from old age. (24) Life and death of a living being as
well as its existence in the other world is determined by its own doing, O king ! None else can
bring happiness or misery to another than the latter's own doing. (25) When a living being
meets (its) death through the medium of a snake, thief, fire or lightning, or through hunger,
thirst, disease and the like, O protector of men, it (only) reaps thereby the fruit of such Karma
as has begun to bear fruit. (26) Therefore, let this sacrifice, actuated as it is by a malevolent
purpose, O king ! be stopped, as serpents burnt through it were (all) innocent. (But you too
are not to blame; for) as a matter of fact, it is the fruit of one's own (past) doings that is reaped
by living beings.” (27)

चूत उवाच

sar: स तथेत्याह महर्षेर्मानयन् वच: । सर्पसत्रादुपरत: पूजयामास वाक्पतिम् ic
सैषा विष्णोर्महामायाबाध्ययालक्षणा यया । मुह्यन्त्यस्यैवात्मभूता भूतेषु गुणवृत्तिभि: 12¢1

न यत्र दम्भीत्यभया विराजिता मायाऽऽत्मवादेऽसकृदात्मवादिभि: |

न यद्दिवादो विविधस्तदाश्रयो मनश्च सङ्कल्पविकल्पवृत्ति चत् ।३०॥

न यत्र wi सृजतोभयो: परं श्रेयश्च जीवस्त्रिभिरन्वितस्त्वहम् ।

ततदेतदुत्सादितबाध्यबाधकं निषिध्य चोर्मीन् विरमेत् wa मुनि: । ३१॥

परं पदं वचैष्णवमामनन्ति तद् यन्नेति नेतीत्यतदुत्सिसृक्षव: |

विसृज्य दौरात्म्यमनन्यसौहदा हृदोपगुह्यावसितं समाहितै: । ३२।
a एतदधिगच्छन्ति विष्णोर्यत् परमं पदम्। अहं ममेति दौर्जन्यं न येषां देहगेहजम् 1३३॥
अतिवादांस्तितिक्षेत नावमन्येत कञ्चन। न चेमं देहमाश्रित्य ai कुर्वीत केनचित् । ३४॥

नमो भगवते तस्मै कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे। यत्पादाम्बुरुहध्यानात् संहितामध्यग्रामिमाम् । ३५॥
