Dis. 70] ॥ BOOK TEN 415

ERRATA व ETH TY eee See EVEN २२२ POET SSAA ESAS SEAS eE eH HOHE EE HE HHH
qh नॄसिंहैर्यदुभिर्यदूत्तमो यथोडुराजो दिवि तारकागणॆ: 1201
त्त्रोपमन्रिणो राजन् नानाहास्यरसैर्विभुम् । उपतस्थुर्नटाचार्या नर्तक्यस्ताण्डवै: पृथक् 1१९1
भृदङ्गवीणामुरजवेणुतालदरस्वनै: । ननृतुर्जगुस्तुष्टुवुश्च सूतमागधवन्दिन: 1201
तत्राहुर्बाह्मणा: केचिदासीना ब्रह्मवादिन: । पूर्वेषां पुण्ययहासां राज्ञां चाकथयन् HAT: । २१1
Pariksit, surrounded by all the Yadus, Sri Krsna would (then) enter the Hall bearing the
name of Sudharma, the inmates of which would not experience (for the time being) the six
waves of existence (viz., hunger and thirst, grief and delusion, old age and death). (1 7) Seated
onanexalted throne, illuminating (all) the quarters with His own splendour and surrounded by
the lions of Yadu’s race, the almighty Lord, the foremost of the Yadus, shone like the moon
in the midst of hosts of stars in the heavens. (18) There the jesters would entertain the Lord
with amusements of various kinds, and (even so) master dancers and dancing girls severally
with (their) dances. (19) Sutas, Magadhas and Vandis would dance, sing and panegyrize the
Lord in accompaniment to clay tomtoms, lutes, tambourines, flutes, cymbals and conchs. (20)
Seated there certain Brahmanas, skilled in exposition, would expound Vedic Mantras, while
others would narrate the stories of ancient kings of sacred renown. (21)
wae: पुरुषो राजन्नागतोऽपूर्वदर्शन: । विज्ञापितो भगवते प्रतीहारै: प्रवेशित: 122
स नमस्कृत्य कृष्णाय परेशाय कृताञ्जलि: | राज्ञामावेदयद् दु:खं जरासन्धनिरोधजम् 123 |
aoa दिग्विजये तस्य सन्नतिं न ययुर्नृपा: । प्रसह्य रुद्धास्तेनासन्नयुते द्वे गिरिव्रजे ।२४॥
कृष्ण कृष्णाप्रमेवात्मन् प्रपन्नभवभञ्जन | वयं wat aot यामो भवभीता: पृथग्धिय: 1241
लोको विकर्मनिरत: कुशले प्रमत्त: कर्मण्ययं त्वदुदिते भवदर्चने स्वे ।
चस्तावदस्य बलवानिह जीविताशां सद्यर्छिनत्त्यनिमिघाय नमोऽस्तु तस्मै ।२६॥
we भवाञ्जगदिन: कलयावतीर्ण: सद्रक्षणाय खलनिग्रहणाय चान्य: |
कश्चित् त्वदीयमतियाति Beanie किं वा जन: स्वकृतमृच्छति Aa विद्म: 1291
fer तदात्मनि qe त्वदनीहलभ्यं क्लिड्यामहेऽतिकृपणास्तव माययेह । २८।
तन्नो भवान् प्रणतज्ञोकहराङ्ध्रियुग्मो वद्धान् वियुङ्क्ष्व मगधाह्वयकर्मपाशात् |
चो भूभुजोऽयुतमतङ्गजवीर्यमेको faye रुरोध sad मृगराडिवावी: ।२९॥
यो aan द्विनवकृत्व उदात्तचक्र भग्नो Wa we भवन्तमनन्तवीर्यम् ।
fren नृल्लोकनिरतं सकृदूढदर्पो युष्मत्मजा रुजति नोऽजितं तद् विधेहि 1201
(One day) O king, a certain person, never seen before, made his appearance there. He
was announced to the Lord by the porters (on duty) and ushered into His presence. (22) The
man bowed to SriKrsna, the Supreme Lord, with joined palms and communicated to Him the
suffering of certain kings caused by their incarceration at the hands of Jarasandha. (23)
(Pariksit,) twenty thousand and odd kings who did not pay homage to him -during his
(expeditions for) the conquest of the (four) quarters, had been forcibly detained by,him at (his
capital) Girivraja (the modern Giridih). (24) (The new comer conveyed their message to Si
Krsna in the following words—)" O Krsna, the Embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss,
whose personality is immeasurable and who destroy the fear of those who have taken refuge

in You! we, who are (yet) possessed of a differential outlook and are afraid of (the cycle of)
birth and death, resort to You for protection.(25) (O Lord !) the generality of people on earth

