258 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

HARKAHKSCKHTKOHAHAHAAEKOOCKHAPCWERALECHKHEEE CEH HEE LORS VE TEER TEES RCH EEE ENE eH व

faupida चरणौ नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद्।नाडीर्नद्यो लोहितेन नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद् । ६७1

क्षुत्तदभ्यामुदरं सिन्धुर्नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराट्।हृदयं मनसा oat नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराट्।६८॥

बुद्ध्या ब्रह्मापि हृदयं नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराट्। रुद्रोऽभिमत्या हृदयं नोदतिष्ठत्तदा विराद्।६९॥

चित्तेन wa चैत्य: क्षेत्रज्त: प्राविशद्यदा। विराद् aca ges: सलिलादुदतिष्ठत iol

am प्रसुप्तं पुरुषं प्राणेन्द्रियमनोधिय:। प्रभवन्ति विना aa नोत्थापयितुमोजसा 102!

तमस्मिन् seme धिया . योगप्रवृत्तया। भक्त्या विरक्त्याज्ञानेन विविच्चात्मनि चिन्तयेत् 102 |

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे कापिलेये तत्त्वसमाम्नाये
षड्विंशाऽध्याय: 126 |
When all the aforesaid deities (with the exception of the Inner Controller), though active,

were unable to rouse the Cosmic Being into activity, they re-entered each his own seat in
order to rouse Him one by one. (62) The god of fire entered His mouth along with the organ
of speech; but the Cosmic Being could not be roused even then. The wind-god entered His
nostrils along with the olfactory sense; but the Cosmic Being refused to wake up even
then.(63) The sun-god entered His eyes alcng with the sense of sight; but the Cosmic Being
failed to get up even then. The Digdevatas entered His ears along with the auditory sense;
but the Cosmic Being could not be stirred into activity even then. (64) The herbs and annual
plants (the deities presiding over the skin) entered the skin along with the hair on the body;
but the Cosmic Being refused to get up even then. The god presiding over the waters entered
His organ of generation along with the faculty of procreation; but the Cosmic Being would
not rise even then. (65) The god of death entered His anus alongwith the organ of defecation;
but the Cosmic Being could not be spurred into activity even then. The god Indra entered the
hands along with their power (of grasping and dropping things); but the Cosmic Being would
not get up even then. (66) Lord Visnu entered His feet along with the faculty of locomotion;
but the Cosmic Being refused to stand up even then. The rivers entered His blood vessels
along with blood (the power of circulation); but the Cosmic Being could not be made to stir
even then. (67) The ocean entered His abdomen alongwith hunger and thirst; but the Cosmic
Being refused to rise even then. The moon-god entered the heart along with the mind; but
the Cosmic Being would not be roused yet. (68) Brahma too entered the heart along with
reason (Buddhi); but even then the Cosmic Being could not be prevailed upon to get up. Lord
Rudra also entered the heart along with the ego; but even then the Cosmic Being could not
be made to rise. (69) When, however, the Inner Controller, the deity presiding over Citta
(reason),entered the heart along with reason, that very moment the Cosmic Being rose from
the causal waters. (70) Even as Prana (the vital air), the Indriyas (the senses of perception
as well as the organs of action), the mind as well as the understanding are unable to awaken
an embodied soul, who is fast asleep, by their own power, without the presence of the Inner
Controller, similarly they could not do so in the case of tne Cosmic Being. (71) Therefore,
through Devotion, dispassion and spiritual wisdom acquired through a concentrated mind
one should contemplate on that Inner Controller as present in this very body, though apart
from it. (72)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse, forming part of the teaching of Lord Kapila
on the nature of the fundamental principles, in Book Three of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Set PATIENT
PIS Ses
