690 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 6

MOPARS शाज GOR HERERO LER AAAI ALE AAEM IEA ATE AR AH ABBA BEE ECHR

Brahmana sage, Yogis shake off the impurities of the mind—occasioned by the Adhibhuta
(the body), Adhyatma (the organs of action) and Adhidaiva (the senses of perception)—and
attain Liberation (cessation of birth and death). (37-38) From that sound emanated (the
sacred syllable) OM—consisting of three parts (A, U, M),—whose origin is unmanifest,
(nay,) which flashes (in the heart) by itself. It is this syllable which reveals (the true nature
of) the almighty and infinite Supreme Spirit—that hears this unmanifest (inarticulate
humming) sound (even) when the sense of hearing has ceased to function (due to the ears
having been shut) and whose cognition is intact (even) when all the senses are inoperative
(as in sound sleep or Samadhi)—by which (sacred syllable) speech (in the form of the Vedas)
is manifested and which owes its manifestation in the cavity of the heart to the (Supreme)
Spirit. (39-40) That syllable (again) is directly expressive of its origin, the infinite Supreme
Spirit; it is the hidden meaning of all Mantras (sacred texts), the eternal seed of the Vedas
(being no other than Brahma Itself). (41)

wa ह्यासंस्रयो ant अकाराद्या भृगूद्वह। धार्यन्ते deat भावा गुणनामार्थवृत्तय: ।४२।
ततोऽक्षरसमाम्नायमसृजद् भगवानज: | अन्त:स्थोष्मस्वरस्पर्शहस्वदीर्घादिलक्षणम् 1४३1
तेनासौ चतुरो वेदांश्चतुर्भिर्वदनैर्विभु:। सव्याहतिकान् सोङ्कारांश्चातुर्होत्रविवक्षया wei
पुत्रानध्यापयत्तांस्तु ब्रह्मर्षीन् ब्रह्मकोविंदान्। ते तु धर्मोपदेष्टार: स्वपुत्रेभ्य: समादिशन् ॥४५॥
a wera प्राप्नास्तत्तच्छिष्यैर्धृतव्रतै: । चतुर्युगेषथ oe द्वापरादौ महर्षिभि: vel
क्षीणायुष: क्षीणसत्त्वान् दुर्मेधान् वीक्ष्य कालत: | वेदान् ब्रह्मर्षयो व्यस्यन् हदिस्थाच्युतचोदिता: ive |

The syllable (OM), 0 jewel of the Bhrgus ! comprised three letter-sounds— अ, उ, and
4, which (severally) hold (in the form of a seed) sets of three entities (viz.,) the (three)
Gunas (modes of Prakrti— Sativa, Rajas and Tamas), the (three) names (Rk. Yajus and
Sama), the (three) substances (spheres, viz., BhUh—the terrestrial globe, Bhuvah—the
aerial region and Swah—heaven) and the (three) states of consciousness (viz., wakefulness,
dream and sound sleep). (42) Out of the aforesaid (three letters) the almighty Brahma (the
birthless creator) evolved the alphabet, comprising Antahsthas (semi-vowels), Usmas
(aspirants), Swaras (vowels), Sparsas (sibilants) andthe short, long and prolated measures
of sounds. (43) With this alphabet the (mighty) Brahma gave expression through his four
mouths to the four Vedas—alongwith the (three) Vyahrtis (Bhuh, Bhuvah and Swah) and
OM (prefixed to the Gayatri-Mantra while reciting it)—with the intention of pointing out the
duties of the four priests (officiating at a sacrifice, viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and
Brahma). (44) He then taught them to his (mind-born) sons (Marici and others), who were
(all) Brahmana sages and (accordingly) expert in reciting the Vedas (with proper intonation
etc.). The latter in their turn proved to be the promulgators of righteousness and taught the
Vedas to their sons (Kasyapa and others). (45) Received from generation to generation in
the course of the four Yugas by the pupils of the various sages—pupils who observed the
vow of (lifelong) celibacy (in order to retain them in their memory)—the aforesaid Vedas
were later on divided by great seers (into Samhitas, Brahmanas and so on) at the end of
the Dwapara age (lit., the period preceded by the Dwapara age). (46) Perceiving the men
to be shortlived, deficient in energy and dull-witted due to the action of Time (in the form .
of unrighteousness prevailing in it), the Brahmana seers rearranged the Vedas as directed
by the immortal Lord residing in their heart. (47)

अस्मिन्नप्यन्तरे ब्रह्मम् भगवाँल्लोकभावन: | ब्रह्मेशाद्यैर्लोकपालैर्याचितो धर्मगुप्तवे । ४८1
RR सत्यवत्यामंशांशकलवा fay: । अवतीर्णो महाभाग aq ah चतुर्विधम् ।४९॥
ऋगथर्वयजु:साम्नां owt वर्गश:। चतस्र: संहिताश्चक्रे मन्नैर्मणिगणा इव iyo!
