Dis. 23] BOOK FIVE 531

HHPEKHK AKAN HH EEHHECEHHPEL LOK KEES HP EEE KK CORSE ३१3 SE KKH HHH ORE HH OH ANAYELET RAHA HM He

अथ त्रयोविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIll

The disposition of the stellar sphere represented in the form of a dolphin
Sy उवाच
AY TATA क्षयोजनान्तरतो यत्तद्विष्णो: परमं पदमभिवदन्ति aa ह महाभागवतो ध्रुव
इदानीमपि कल्पजीविनामाजीव्य उपास्ते तस्येहानुभाव उपवर्णित:।१। a fe सर्वेषां ज्योतिर्गणानां
शश्वदवभासते | २ । ॥

Sri Suka continued : Now, at a height of thirteen lakh Yojanas beyond the Great Bear,
lies (in the form of the pole-star) what they call the highest abode* of Lord Visnu, where
indeed resides the great devotee of the Lord, Dhruva, son of Uttanapada, who is being
circumambulated clockwise with great reverence even to this day by Agni (the god of fire),
Indra (the chief of the gods), KaSyapa, a lord of created beings, and Dharma (the god of
virtue)—all moving synchronously (in the form of stars)—and who is the mainstay (resort)
of (all) those who live (even) at the time of Pralaya (when all the three worlds perish). His glory
has (already) been described in (Book Four of) this (holy) book (Srimad Bhagavata). (1)
Indeed he shines eternally (in the form of a star), fixed as he is by God, like a post holding
togetherall the multitudes of luminaries, including planets and lunar mansions, thatare being
made to revolve by the ever-vigilant and all-powerful Time of incomprehensible speed. (2)

यथा मेढीस्तम्भ आक्रमणपशव: संयोजितास्तिभिस्तिभि: सवनैर्यथास्थानं मण्डलानि चरन्त्येवं
भगणाग्रहादय एतस्मिन्नन्तर्बहिर्योगेन कालचक्र आयोजिता ध्रुवमेवावलम्ब्य वायुनोदीर्यमाणा आकल्पान्तं
परिचङ्क्रमन्ति नभसि यथा मेघा: श्येनादयो वायुवशा: कर्मसारथय: waded एवं ज्योतिर्गणा:
प्रकृतिपुरुषसंयोगानुगृहीता: कर्मनिर्मितगतयो भुवि न पतन्ति। ३।

Just as (pairs of) oxen, trampling corn (in order to thresh it) while (remaining) tied to a
post in the middle of a threshing-floor, walk round in their respective spheres, in three circles
(gradually receding from that post), so the hosts of luminaries including the planets—
fastened as they are to the aforesaid wheel (revolving movement) of Time either in the inner
circle (remote from the earth) orin the outer one (nearer the earth) and propelled by the wind
(called Pravaha and referred to in passage 8 of Discourse XX!)—revolve round the pole-star
as the pivot till the end of a Kalpa (the life-time of the three worlds) in three courses
(northward, southward and along the equator). (And just) as clouds and birds such as the
hawk move aboutin the sky, suspendedin the air and helped by their destiny (which keeps
them floating in the air and prevents them from falling down), so the hosts of luminaries
(which are no other than particular Jivas appearing in those form)—brought into existence
by the union of matter and Spirit (occasioned by the destiny responsible for their assuming
such forms) and reaping the fruit yielded by their (past) actions—(move about in the air
and) do not fall to the ground.(3)

Ce = free foretareetee + दे 5 (यन्ति। ४॥ यस्य

* In the region of the pole-star Lord Visnu ever remains manifest. It is in this sense that it has been spoken of here as well
as at other places as the highest abode of Lord Visnu. It is surely different from the Lord's own realm. known by the name of
Vaikuntha, which lies beyond the matenal plane.

