552 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 8

EPROM OEE OEE EEO BEELER ENSUE TES EH CLOT UTETE CHORUSES HED CONS आआ ना न शा६ 8४ २४ eee

The Brahmana said : O king ! pleasure and pain which come through the senses are
experienced in heaven as well as in hell by embodied beings; therefore a wise man should
not seek them. (1) Like a python one should eat food, obtained without effort, whether it be
more or less and sweet or bitter. (2) If no food reaches one, (then) like the python let one go
without it and make no effort to obtain it. Let one sleep for many days patiently believing that
itis Fate which provides food. (3) Bearing one's body actionless even when one is strong of
body, mind and senses, and lying down, though sleepless, one should do nothing, though
having the strength to exercise senses. (4) An ascetic should be quiet and grave like the calm
deep sea. He should be inscrutable, dominated by none and unaffected by time and space
and unperturbed by likes and dislikes. (5) An ascetic devoted to the Lord, whether he has
or has not the desired objects, should feel neither elated nor depressed just as the ocean
does not swell when rivers flow into it nor dries up when they do not. (6) When the man who
has no control over his senses sees the Maya of the Lord in the shape of a woman, he is
allured by her gestures and falls into the darkness of hell just as a moth falls into fire. (7) The
ignorant man allured by the gold ornaments, clothes etc., of a woman for the sake of
enjoyment of these objects, which are the creation of the Lord’s Maya, loses his discrimina-
tion and is destroyed like a moth. (8) An ascetic should take food in small quantities (from
householders), without giving them any trouble, and barely enough to maintain his body, and
thus adopt the course of the black bee. (9) Like the bee collecting honey from (many) flowers
a discriminating person should gather the essence from all scriptures, great or small. (10)
He should not keep in store for the evening or the following day the food collected by begging;
his hands (alone) should be the vessel and belly, the receptacle for food. He should not be
a hoarder like the bee. (11) Amendicant should keep nothing in store, either for the evening
or the day following; he who does it perishes like a bee with that collection. (12) A begging
ascetic should not touch even with his foot even the wooden figure of a youthful woman: if
he touched it, he would be chained like the elephant brought in contact with a she-
elephant.(13) A wise man should never seek a woman, who is his death (as it were); (for)
he might be killed by other more powerful persons (after her) just as an elephant is killed by
stronger tuskers. (14) Riches amassed with great pains by misers are neither enjoyed by
them nor gifted away; they are enjoyed by some other person, who like the honey-gatherer
discovers the hoard (and appropriates it). (15) Like the honey-gatherer, the ascetic really first
enjoys the riches of householders who have amassed them with great pains and with a view
to enjoying them. (16) An ascetic, living in a forest, should never hear vulgar songs. He
should take this lesson from the deer, which attracted by the music of the hunter gets
snared.(17) Enjoying the vulgar dance, instrumental musicand songs of women, Rsyasrnga,
born of a deer, became a plaything in the hands of women. (18) Enraptured by love of taste.
a foolish person, through his uncontrollable tongue, is destroyed like the fisn by the
hooks.(19) Through fasting wise men can soon contro! their senses, except the tongue
which becomes more powerful in the case of a fasting person. (20) One may have subdued
all other senses; but, unless one conquers the sense of taste. one cannot be said to have
gained self-control; allsenses get subdued when the sense of taste is conquered. (21) Now
hear O prince, what | fearnt from Pingala, a courtesan, who at one time lived in the city of
Videha (Mithila). (22) One day that courtesan decorated her person at night and in order to
take her paramour in the pleasure-house she sat just outside the house at the door. (23) 0
the best of men, on seeing the passers-by she, desirous of money. took them as rich men
seeking pleasure on payment of money. (24) Seeing the passers-by gone, she, who lived
upon her solicitations, began to indulge in the hope that some other rich man would come
