Dis. 2 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA

HIE He FC Me Be Ht ENE MC We MEE HEHE EW MY EH He RYE RE RE HE Mr BE RE RE REORE MMe Me He We Yt Me Me He Be BS OE BER MERE MEME ROR ORO AEH WE ८ ८.६ ६.३.३ ८ ३ त KEKE ME HEM He HE

सत्यादित्रियुगे बोधवैराग्यो मुक्तिसाधकौ । कलौ तु केवला भक्तिर्ब्रह्मसायुज्यकारिणी । ४ ।
sta निश्चित्य चिद्रूप: सद्रूपां त्वां wast ह। परमानन्दचिन्मूर्ति: ged कृष्णवल्लभाम् । ५ J
बदध्वाञ्जलिं त्वया पृष्टं किं करोमीति चैकदा | al तदाऽऽज्ञापयत्कृष्णो मद्भक्तान् पोषयेति च । ६ ।
अङ्गीकृतं त्वया तद्वै प्रसन्नोऽभूद्धरिस्तदा । मुक्तिं दासीं ददौ तुभ्यं ज्ञानवैराग्यकाविमौ । ७ ।
पोषणंस्वेनरूपेणवैकुण्ठेत्वंकरोपिच।भूमौभक्तविपोघग्र्यछायारूपंत्वयाकृत्तम्।क्ष्य

Narada began again : In vain do you vex yourself, O young woman ! Oh, why should you
be so afflicted with worry ? Think of the lotus-feet of SriKrsna and your misery will be gone. (1)
The celebrated Sri Krsna, by whom Draupadi was saved from the tyranny of the Kauravas,
(nay,) by whom the pretty girls of Vraja were made the recipients of (special) favours, has
gone nowhere. (2) You, Bhakti, as a matter of fact, are ever dearer to the Lord than His own
life. Invoked by you indeed, the Lord goes even to the houses of the low. (3) In the three Yugas
commencing from Satya (viz., Satya Yuga, Treta and Dvapara) spiritual enlightenment and
dispassion were the means to achieve redemption (of the soul). In Kali, however, Bhakti
alone effects unity with Brahma.(4) Concluding thus, they say, the Lord (who is all Spirit),
the embodiment of supreme bliss and consciousness, evolved you, the embodiment of
Truth, as a charming girl, the beloved of Sri Krsna. (5) Joining your palms (as a token of
submission), you once asked Him, "What shall | do ?" SriKrsna then commanded you, "Look
after My devotees !" (6) This was accepted by you as a matter of fact and Sri Hari felt (highly)
gratified at that time and conferred on you, on the said occasion,as a maid-servant Mukti
(Liberation) as well as these two, Jfiana and Vairagya (as your sons). (7) In your real form
you look after the devotees in Vaikuntha; (while) a shadow-form has been assumed by you
to take care of the devotees on earth. (8)

मुक्तिं ज्ञानं विरक्तिं च सह Ha गता yal कृतादिद्वापरस्यान्तं महानन्देन संस्थिता । ९ ।
wel मुक्ति: क्षयं प्राप्ता पाखण्डामयपीडिता | त्वदाज्ञया गता a Ages पुनरेव सा । १०॥
स्मृता त्वयापि asa मुक्तिरायाति याति च । पुत्रीकृत्य त्वयेमौ च oy स्वस्यैव रक्षितौ । ११।
उपेक्षात: कलौ मन्दौ वृद्धौ जातो सुतौ तव । तथापि चिन्तां qe त्वमुपायं चिन्तयाम्यहम् । १२।
कलिना सदृश: cist amt नास्ति वरानने | तस्मिंस्त्वां स्थापयिष्यामि गेहे गेहे जने जने । १३॥
अन्यधर्मांस्तिरस्कृत्य पुरस्कृत्य महोत्सवान्। तदा नाहं हरेर्दासो लोके त्वां न प्रवर्तये ew
त्वदन्विताश्च ये sitet भविष्यन्ति कलाविह | पापिनोऽपि गमिष्यन्ति निर्भयं कृष्णामन्दिरम् । १५॥
येषां fad वसेद्भक्ति: सर्वदा प्रेमरूपिणी । न a agate कीनाहां स्वप्नेऽप्यमलमूर्तय: 1१६॥
न प्रेतो न पिशाचो वा राक्षसो वासुरोऽपि वा । भक्तियुक्तमनस्कानां wa न प्रभुर्भवेत् । १७॥
न तपोभिर्न वेदैश्च न ज्ञानेनापि कर्मणा । हरिर्हि साध्यते भक्त्या प्रमाणं तत्र गोपिका: 1221
भक्तिद्रोहकरा ये च a सीदन्ति जगत्त्रये। दुर्वासा दु:खमापन्न: ga भक्तविनिन्दक: 1201
Taking Mukti, Jana and Vairagya with you, you came down to the earth. From Krtayuga
down to the end of Dvapara you stayed here with great joy.(9) Afflicted with the malady of

false doctrines (however) Mukti underwent decay in Kaliyuga and under your direction she
returned to Vaikuntha soon. (10) Yet, even when thought of by you, she comes to this very

