Dis. 12 ] BOOK FOUR 347

LASEK A ATER HSS यमोदेकक ३८8 EEE AEH HAH OEE AREER RARER HH

way asad gy cart fieitrseogtamit |

waa नामानि गृणन्मधुद्विष: पाषत्मधानाविति संहताञ्जलि: 1221
aq कृष्णपादाभिनिविष्टचेतसं बद्धाञ्जलिं प्रश्रयनम्रकन्धरम्।
- सुनन्दनन्दावुपसृत्य afd yee: पुष्करनाभसम्मतौ 1221

There (at Visala) he purified his mind by taking a plunge in the sacred waters (of the holy
Ganga) and, after steadying himself in a squatting posture, controlled his breath (through
the process of Pranayama). Then, having withdrawn his senses (from the outside world) with
the help of his mind, he fixed it on the gross (cosmic) form of the Lord, and meditating on it
till the distinction of subject and object altogether disappeared from his mind, he was lost in
Samadhi (abstract meditation) and abandoned the thought even of that (cosmic body). (17)
Maintaining an unceasing flow of devotion towards Lord Sri Hari, he was bathed ina stream
of blissful tears again and again. His heart melted (with emotion), a thrill ran through all his
limbs, and rid of self-identification with the body, he lost consciousness even of his own
individuality. (18) While in that state, Dhruva beheld an excellent aerial car descending fronr
the heavens. Like a rising full moon, it shed a bright lustre all round’as well as above and
below. (19) He further saw therein two foremost divinities, swarthy of hue, possessed of four
arms and-eyes resembling a pair of red lotuses, clad in a beautiful attire and adorned with
crowns, pearl necklaces, armlets and charming ear-rings. They were still in the prime of
youth and stood leaning against their maces. (20) Concluding them to be attendants of Lord
Visnu (of excellent renown), he sprang on his feet, and forgetting in the flurry (of the moment)
the prescribed course (of worship), (simply) bowed to them with joined palms, uttering the
names of the Lord (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) and thinking them to be His foremost
attendants. (21) Sunanda and Nanda, the two esteemed attendants of Lord Visnu (who has
a lotus sprung from His navel), approached Dhruva—whose mind was set on Sri Krsna's
feet, and who stood with joined palms, his head bent low in humility—and smilingly spoke
(as follows). (22)

सुनन्दनन्दाचूचतु:

भो भो राजन् सुभद्रं ते are नोऽवहित: sia: पञ्चवर्षस्तपसा भवान्देवमतीतृपत् 1231
तस्याखिलजगद्धातुरावां देवस्य wisn: । पार्षदाविह सम्प्राप्तौ नेतुं al भगवत्पदम् ।२४॥
सुदुर्जयं विष्णुपदं ft am यत्सूरयोऽप्राप्य विचक्षते परम्।
आतिष्ठ तच्चन्द्रदिवाकरादयो ग्रहर्क्षतारार परियन्ति दक्षिणम् ।२५॥
अनास्थितं ते पितृभिरन्यैरप्यङ् कर्हिचित्। आतिष्ठ जगतां at तद्विष्णो: परमं पदम् । २६॥
एतद्विमानप्रवरमुत्तमह्लोकमौलिना | उपस्थापितमायुष्मन्नधिरोढुं त्वमर्हसि 1291

Sunanda and Nanda said : O king; God bless you, listen attentively to our words—you,
who succeeded in propitiating the Lord through (your) penance while yet a child of five ! (23)
We two are attendants of the selfsame Lord, the Wielder of the famous Sarnga bow and the
Sustainer of the whole world, and have called here to take you to the Lord’s abode. (24) You
have secured (an abode in) the realm of Lord Visnu, which is exceedingly difficult to attain
to, and which even the seers (the sages presiding over the seven stars known by the name
of the Great Bear) are unable to reach and only look up to from below. (Come with us and)
take up your abode there. Planets, lunar mansions and other stars, including the sun and
