524 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

BrP WOR RT Ry MRE ERE शा नो जो वी जं Re HR RO चो आ RR We क्त RRR WT NE We eT जो EE ME HE को क जको RHA ERT व च BHR HOR

of the sky, the glorious sun, the lord of the luminaries, warms by its heat and illuminates by
its light (all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the space lying between them). (Coursing)
by slow, swift and regulated marches, known by the names of Uttarayana (the northerly
march from the equator to the summer solstice and back to the equator), Daksinayana (the
southerly march from the equator to the winter solstice and back to the equator) and the
Vaisuvata (the march across the equator at the equinoxes) and rising higher (in the
heavens), going down and taking a mean position whenever and wherever such positions
are inevitable (under the divine law), the sun, while passing through the signs of the zodiac,
from Makara (Capricornus) onwards, lengthens the days while shortening the nights and
vice versa and brings their duration on a par. (3) When the sun traverses the signs* of Mesa
(Aries) and Tula (Libra), the days and nights are (more or less) of equal length and when it
traverses the five signs from Vrsabha (Taurus) onwards (viz., Vrsabha, Mithuna, Karkata,
Simha and Kanya or Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo and Virgo), days become longer and
longer only while nights become shorter (on an average) by nearly half an hour (24 minutes)
every month. (4) When (however) the sun traverses the five signs from Vrscika onwards (viz.,
Vrscika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Minaor Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius
and Pisces), days become shorter and nights (proportionately) longer. (5) Days grow in
length till the sun takes to the southward course and nights become longer and longer till it
takes a northward turn. (6)
एवं नव को क्षाणि चोजनानां araafhftaftentaedrafreea afer
पुरीं पूर्वस्मान्मेरोर्देवधानीं am दक्षिणतो याम्यां संयमनीं नाम uvergrecn निम्लोचनीं नाम उत्तरत:
मेरोश्चतुर्दिशम्। ७ । तत्रत्यानां दिवसमध्यङ्घत wa सदाऽऽदित्यस्तपति सव्येनाचलं दक्षिणेन करोति । ८ |
प्रस्वापयति त्त्र गतं न पश्यन्ति ये तं समनुपश्येरन्। ९ ।
The learned declare the distance + covered by the revolution of the sun on the top of the
(circular) Manasottara mountain as described heretofore (vide V. xx. 80) to be nine crore and
fifty one lakh Yojanas (or seventy-six crore and eight lakh miles) and (further) mention the

* As the sun never remains ata fixed position according to the ancients andis constantly changing its course, turning more
and more either towards the north or towards the south, days and nights are of equal duration, strictly speaking, only on two
days ina year, viz., on the vernal and autumnal equinoxes. But the disparity in their length is very negligible during these two
parts of the year, covering a total period of nearly two months, as it never exceeds 24 minutes. It!s therefore that days and
nights are spoken of as equal in tength during this period. Similarly the length of days gradually increases and the length of
nights is proportionately reduced only when the sun traverses the signs of Vrsabha and Mithuna; while during the other three
months, viz., when the Sun traverses the signs of Karkata, Sirhha and Kanya, the order is reversed, thatis to say, the length
of nights gradually Increases and that of days diminishes. Days, however, nonetheless continue to be longer than nights till
the sun takes to the southward course— vide passage (6) above. It is in this light that the statement in the latter part of
passage(4) above should be interpreted. And the statement made in passage (5) above should also be construed likewise.
Even so the monthly rate of fall in the duration of nights during the five months of the sun’s northward course and in the length
of days during the corresponding months of its southward course isnot uniform every month: sometimes it exceeds 24 minutes,
while at other times it is less than 24 minutes. 24 minutes should, therefore, be taken to be the average rate.

+ By adding together half the diameter (fifty thousand Yojanas) of Jambudwipas—which lies at the centre of the lotus-like
terrestrial globe—and the widih of the five other circular Dwipas surrounding it, each of which is twice as large as the one
preceding it, as well as of the six belts of oceans encircling the six Dwipas, each of which is equalin extent to the Dwipa enclosed
