310 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

ज शीडी तवे य उ ती ॐरकी क्तत् कौ ज का डौ ककक REOHRELOHH LEAK LCE RECHEREECEHEEH ET eee eet hee eee ete eo
च्प्तिं

wish the sacrifice to be revived (and completed), make haste to crave the forgiveness of that
Divinity (Lord Siva), who was stung to the quick by the abusive words (of Daksa) and has
now lost His beloved spouse; for the world with its guardian deities will be nowhere if He
continues to be angry. (6) Neither | nor Yajfia (the deity presiding over sacrifices) nor (any
of) you (the other gods) nor the sages, much less any other embodied beings know His true
character or the extent of His strength and power. None would feel inclined (under the
circumstance) to contrive any means (other than clasping His feet) to placate Him who is
(absolutely) independent* (7)

स seme सुरानजस्तै: antes: पितृभि: ase ।

ययौ स्वधिष्ण्यान्निलयं पुरद्विष: कैलासमद्रिप्रवरं प्रियं प्रभो: । ८ ।
जन्मौषधिंतपोमन्त्रयोगसिद्धैर्नरितरै: । जुष्टं किन्नरगन्धर्वैरप्सरोभिर्वृते सदा । ९ ।
नानामणिमयॆ: शृङ्गेर्नानाधातुविचित्रितै: | नानाद्रुमलतागुल्मैर्नानामृगगणावृतै: । १०
नानामलप्रस्रव्रणैर्नानाकन्दरसानुभि: । रमणं विहरन्तीनां wu: सिद्धयोषिताम् । ee
मयूरकेकाभिरुतं मदान्धालिविमूर्चितम् gad रक्तकण्ठानां कूजितैश्च cafe 192 |
आह्वयन्तमिवोद्धस्तैर्दिजान् aguas: । व्रजन्तमिव मातङ्गैर्गृणन्तमिव निर्झरै: । १३

Having thus enjoined the gods, and accompanied by them as well as by the manes and
the lords of created beings, Brahma (the birthless creator) went from his own realm (the
Brahmaloka) to Mount Kailasa, the chiei of the mountains, the beloved abode of Lord Siva
(the Destroyer of the three cities). (8) Mount Kailasa is inhabited by gods endowed with
Supernatural powers from their very birth or who acquired them by the use of specific herbs,
by recourse to austere penance and spells or through the practice of Yoga, and is ever
crowded with Kinnaras and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and Apsaras (heavenly
dancing girls). (9) With its summits consisting of jewels of various kinds and variegated with
minerals of every description—which are clothed with trees, creepers and shrubs of various
species and infested with wild beasts of every kind, nay, which contain many a rill of limpid
water and are spotted with many a cave and eminence—it affords delight to the wives of
Siddhas (a class of heavenly being endowed with supernatural powers from their very birth),
that sport there in the company of their spouses. (10-11) The mountain is resonant with the
screams of peacocks and echoes with the melodious humming of bees blinded by
intoxication. Nay, through the shrill notes of its cuckoos and the warbling of other birds and
by its wish-yielding trees with their towering boughs it seems to call new birds, raising its
arms; nay, through its (moving) elephants it seems to be in motion and through its
(murmuring) rills it appears to speak. (12-13)

mart: पारिजातैश्च सरलैश्चोपञ्ञोभितम्।तमालै: ज्ञालतालैश्च कोविदारासनार्जुनै: । १४॥
चूतै: कदम्बैर्नीपैश्च नागपुन्नागचम्पकै: | पाटलाञ्ञोकबकुलै: कुन्दे:; कुरबकैरपि ।१५॥
स्वर्णार्णशतपत्रैश्च वररेणुकजातिभि: | कुब्जकैर्मल्लिकाभिश्च माधवीभिश्च मण्डितम् । १६
पनसोढुम्बराश्वत्थप्लक्षन्यग्रोधहिङ्गुभि: । भूर्जेरोषधिभि: gt राजपूगैश्च जम्बुभि: । १७॥
खर्जूराम्रातकाम्राद्यै: प्रियालमधुकेङ्गुदै: | द्रुमजातिभिरन्यैश्च राजितं वेणुकीचकै: । १८।
कुमुदोत्पलकह्लारशतपत्रवनरद्धिभि: । नलिनीषु कलं कूजत्खगवृन्दोपशोभितम् ।१९॥
कर्णान्रैकपदाश्वास्यर्निर्जुष्ट वृकनाभिभि: | कदलीखण्डसंरुद्धनलिनीपुलिनश्रियम् । २१॥
Tat नन्दया सत्या: स्नानपुण्यतरोदया | विलोक्य भूतेशगिरिं विबुधा विस्मयं ay: 1221
