154 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 _

HHCHKACSRHHTECHE TE HHSC HEE EEO OH रीक तीण EHTS EH PEE THE EEE ET FEE TH हि ॐ EVER RETA HEHE HH

was evolved the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which, as the dispeller of
darkness (in the form of ignorance), is of the nature of understanding and is capable of
manifesting the universe existing in itself (in a subtle form). (27) Subject to the Cidabhasa
(Jiva), the three Gunas (constituting Maya) and Time, this Mahat, when it fell within the range
of the Lord's vision, transformed itself with the intention of creating this universe. (28) From
the Mahat-tattva, as it underwent transformation, was evolved the principle of ‘Aham’ (the
ego) which, being of the nature of Adhibhita, Adhyatma and Adhidaiva, is the cause of the
five gross elements, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action)
and the mind. (29) Ahankara (the ego) is of three kinds—Vaikarika (Sattvika), Taijasa
(Rajasika) and Tamasika. From the Sattvika ego, as it underwent transformation, sprang up
the mind, as well as the deities presiding over the senses, who are all of a Sattvika type,
revealing as they do the objects of senses. (30) The senses of perception as well as the
organs of action are evolutes of the Rajasika ego alone; whereas from the Tamasika ego was
evolved the source of the other subtle elements, (viz., sound). And this latter, again, is the
cause of ether, which (by virtue of its all-pervasiveness) serves as an illustration of the Spirit
(Brahma). (31) When ether came within the range of the Lord's vision along with Time, Maya

` and the Jiva, they combined to produce the sensation of touch; and this latter, as it underwent
transformation, evolved the air. (32) The most powerful air, even as it underwent transfor-
mation, combined with ether to produce the sensation of colour and from colour was evolved
fire, the illuminator of the world. (33) Fire, when it came within the range of the Lord's vision
and underwent transformation, combined with air as well as with Time, Maya and the Jiva
to produce water, which is an evolute of taste. (84) Water, when it came within the sight of
the all-perceiving Brahma and underwent transformation, combined with fire as well as with
Time, Maya and the Jiva to evolve the earth which has odour for its special characteristic.(35)
Of the elements beginning with ether (viz., ether, air, fire, water and earth), O blessed Vidura,
the later in evolution the elements, the larger number of qualities it should be understood to
possess; for every effect naturally inherits the characteristics of its cause along with its own
characteristics.(36) The deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and other categories,
sharing as they do the characteristics of Time, Maya and the Jiva (viz., transformation,
distraction and consciousness), are rays of Lord Visnu Himself. But when they were unable
to do their work (of creating the universe) because of their heterogeneity (and lack of co-
ordination), they prayed to the almighty Lord with joined palms:—(37)

देवा HY:
नमाम ते देव पदारविन्दं प्रपन्नतापोपशमातपत्रम् !
यन्मूलकेता यतयोऽञ्जसोरु संसारदु:खं बरहिरुत्क्षिपन्ति । ३८1
धातर्यदस्मिन् भव ईश जीवास्तापत्रयेणोपहता न र्म ।
आत्मल्लभन्ते भगवंस्तवाङ्ध्रिच्छायाँ सविद्यामत आश्रयेम ।३९॥
यस्याघमर्षोदसरिद्वराया: We We तीर्थपद: प्रपन्ना: 1४०॥
we श्रुतवत्या च भक्ता संमृज्यमाने हृदयेऽवधाय ।
wt वैराग्यबलेन धीरा ब्रजेम तत्तेऽङ्ध्रिसरोजपीठम् ।४१॥
fara जन्मस्थितिसंयमार्थे कृतावतारस्य पदाम्बुजं ते
am ad MO यदीश स्मृतं प्रयच्छत्यभयं स्वपुंसाम् ॥४२॥
यत्सानुबन्धेऽसति देहगेहे ममाहमित्यूढदुराग्रहाणाम् ।
