Dis. 6] BOOK TEN 125

७७१ १ १ १ ७११ १७० १ REE 4 ७० 4 ० ११4 ११११ १७ १ ११११ १७२ ७७२२ ७२ ७७ ७ ७ ७७ ७ ७ ७ AE ७ १. ३ ७ ७१०७ ७१७० १७ ०७०० ५.७.७ ० ७ ०७

सन्तत्रसु: स्म ae वीक्ष्य गोपा गोप्य: कलेवरम् । पूर्वं तु तन्नि:स्वनितभिन्नहत्कर्णमस्तका:। १७

ad amen उरसि क्रीडन्तमकुतोभयम् । गोप्यस्तूर्णं समभ्येत्य जगृहुर्जातसम्भ्रमा:। ec

यशोदारोहिणीभ्यां a: समं बालस्य सर्वत: । tat विदधिरे सप्यगां।पुच्छभ्रमण् दिभि: । १९।

गोमूत्रेण स्रापयित्वा पुनर्गोरजसार्भकम् । tet चक्रुश्च शकृता द्वादशाङ्गेषु नामभि:। २०॥

Tra: संस्पृष्टसलिला अङ्गेषु करयो: पृथक् । न्यस्यात्मन्यथ बालस्य बीजन्यासमकुर्वत। २१।

Even while falling down, her (colossal) body crushed, 0 ruler of kings, trees within
(an area of) twelve miles. That was a great wonder. (14) Its mouth was ranged with
fearful teeth as long as a plough-tree; its nostrils resembled a pair of mountain caves;
its breasts lookéd like a couple of huge rocks; its coppery hair hung loose; its eyes
were deep like a well overgrown with plants etc.; it looked terrible with its hips
resembling sand-banks; its arms, thighs and feet resembled dams; while its belly looked
like a waterless pond. The cowherds and cowherdesses were really much frightened to
see that fearful body, their heart, ears and head having already been split by her yell. (15—17)
And finding the boy fearlessly piaying on her bosom, the cowherd women quickly went
up to Him and picked Him up, alarmed as they were. (18) Along with YaSoda and Rohini
they fully ensured the safety of the boy (against evil spirits) on all sides by waving round
him the tail of a cow (which has been declared in the scriptures to be the seat of
Goddess Laksmi) and other occult rites. (19) Having bathed the boy with the urine of
a cow (which is held to be as sacred as the water of the holy Ganga) and again
sprinkling him with the dust under the hoofs of cows (which is considered to be as good
as sprinkling with the totality of all sacred waters), they (further) ensured his security by
daubing him with cowdung (which is recognized as another seat of Goddess Laksmi)
at twelve points while uttering (twelve different) names” (of the Lord). (20) Having sipped
water and assigned (a number of ) seed-letters (representing the first letters of the
following eleven names of the Lord, followed by a nasal sound—Anuswara) separately
to the (diverse) limbs of their (own) body as well as to (the parts of) their hands, the
cowherd women next assigned the same seed-letters to the limbs and (paris of) the
hands of the baby. (21)

हत् केशवस्त्वदुर ईंश इनस्तु कण्ठं विष्णुर्भुजं मुखमुरुक्रम ईश्वर: कम्।२२॥

चक्रघग्रत: सहगदो हरिरस्तु wear त्वत्पार्श्वयोर्धनुरसी मधुहाजनश्च।

कोणेषु शङ्ख उरुगाय उपर्युपेन्द्रस्तार्क्य: क्षितौ हलधर: Yeu: समन्तात्। २३॥
इन्दियाणि हृषीकेश: प्राणान् नारायणोऽवतु । श्वेतद्वीपपतिश्चित्तं मनो योगेश्वरोऽवतु। २४॥
पृश्निगर्भस्तु ते बुद्धिमात्मानं war, पर:। क्रीडन्तं पातु गोविन्द: शयानं पातु माधव:। २५ ।

* The twelve names to be uttered on such occasion and the twelve limbs to be louched whila doing so ara

specified in tha following verses of the Padmapurana :—
ललाटे केशवं ध्यायेननारायणमथोदरे । वक्ष:स्थले माघवं तु गोविन्दं कण्ठकूबरे॥
विष्णुं च दक्षिणे कुक्षौ बाहौ च मधुसूदनम् । त्रिविक्रमं कन्धरे तु वामनं वामपार्श्वके॥
श्रीधरं वामबाहौ तु हृषीकेशं तु कन्धरे । पृष्ठे तु पद्मनाभं च कट्यां दामोदरं न्यसेत्॥

“Ona should visuallza Kagava on ona’s forehead, Narayana on tha belly, Madhava on tha breast and Govinda
en the back ot ona's neck, Visnu in tha right side of tha abdomen and MadhusUdana on the right arm, Trivikrama
on tha neck, VAmana on tha left sida (ot the abdomen), Sndhara on the left arm and Hrsikega again on the neck,
Padmanabha on tha back and Oamodara on the waist.”

This shows that the Gopis of Vraja were all Vaisnavas.

