546 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 7

# 3599 9 ११११ १ ११ HESS AES ०१ १०१२ 4 SEE NEL EOCENE १६ १५१9 HENNA COHEN AEE RAT #9 9० 9४० 4 9 ८७७ 4 # #

renunciation which has been taught by You. (16) 0 Lord, | do not see, except You, anyone
even among the celestials, who can give me instruction about the self-revealed Atma, the
only Truth. (Even) Brahma andall these beings are deluded by Your Maya as they look upon
external things as real. (17) Therefore, afflicted as | am with sorrows and with my mind turned
away from the world, O Lord, I, seek refuge in You, who are (no other than) Lord Narayana,
the friend of (all) living beings, devoid of (all) defects, eternal and infinite, omniscient, the
supreme Ruler of all, whose abode is the eternal Vaikuntha ! (18)

प्रायेण मनुजा लोके लोकतत्त्वविचक्षणा: । समुद्धरन्ति ह्यात्पानमात्मनैवाशुभाशयात् 128 |
आत्मनो गुरुरात्मैव पुरुषस्य विझेषत: । यत् प्रत्यक्षानुमानाभ्यां श्रेयोऽसावनुविन्दते 120 |
geet च मां धीरा: सांख्ययोगविशारदा: । आविस्तरां प्रपद्यन्ति सर्वहक्त्युपबृंहितम् 1221
एकद्वित्रिचतुष्पादो बहुपादस्तथापद: | बह्वय: सन्ति पुर: सृष्टास्तासां मे पौरुषी प्रिया 1221
wa मां मार्गयन्त्यद्धा युक्ता हेतुभिरीश्वरम्। गृह्यमाणैर्गुणैर्लिङ्गैरग्राह्यमनुमानत: 1231
अत्राप्युदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम्। अवधूतस्य dae यदोरमिततेजस: revi
ve द्विजं कञ्चिच्चरन्तमकुतोभयम्। कविं निरीक्ष्य तरुणं यदु: umes धर्मवित् । २५
The Lord replied : In this world those who are engaged in investigating the true nature
of this world often lift themselves up by their own efforts and rid themselves of the craving
for the pleasures of sense. (19) The Atma itself is indeed the (infallible) guide of one’s own
self, especially in the case of man, inasmuch as by direct perception and inference he can
work out his own good. (20) In their human birth persons of ripe judgment and knowing the
secret of Sarhkhya and Yoga (the paths of Knowledge and Action) directly and clearly
perceive Me as their own Self endowed with all faculties. (21) Numerous forms of living
beings with one foot, with two, three, four or many feet and also without feet stand evolved
by Me. Of them (all) the human body is (most) dear to Me. (22) (And) here (inthe human body)
those who are ever vigilant directly discover Me, the Supreme Ruler—who cannot be
perceived (by ordinary means of perception)—through assumption’ based on evidences in
the shape of materia! instruments (such as the intellect), which are (themselves) open to
perception, as well as through inference on the same grounds. (23) By way of anillustration
On this subject they narrate the following ancient legend in the form of a dialogue between
an ascetic of a high order and Yadu of great prowess and intelligence. (24) Perceiving a
youthful Brahmanat with an unclean body, though full of wisdom, roaming about fearlessly,
Yadu, who knew what is Dharma (piety), put (the following) questions to him. (25)

यदुरुवाच

कुतो बुद्धिरियं ब्रह्मन्नकर्तु: सुविशारदा । यामासाद्य भवाँल्लोकं विद्वांश्चरति बालवत् । २६॥

प्रायो धर्मार्थकामेषु विवित्सायां च मानवा: । हेतुनैव समीहन्ते आयुषो यञ्स: Bra: 1201

त्वं तु कल्प: कविर्दंक्ष: सुभगोऽमृतभाषण: । न कर्ता नेहसे किञ्चिजडोन्मत्तपिञ्ञाचवत् । २८॥

जनेषु ददह्यमानेषु कामलोभदवाम्निना । न तप्यसेऽग्निना मुक्तो गङ्गाम्भ:स्थ इव द्विप: । २९।

त्वं हि न: godt ब्रह्मन्नात्मन्यानन्दकारणम् । ब्रूहि स्पर्शाविहीनस्य waa: Samra: 1301
* The assumption Is that material instruments such as the intellect cannot lead to perception of objects unless Iney are
themselves Illumined by some self-effulgent principle such as the Self or God. And the form of the inference ts that just as
appliances like a hatchet can be wielded only by an active agent. so the mtellect etc., too are being used by some mMtelligent

agent
tA reference to II. vu. 4 leads us to conclude that the Brahmana was no other than Lord Daltatreya
