. Dis. 1) ~ BOOK THREE °* 135

ZHINEINI oni Renin i toininini atin sree tent eeiind denise 8 aie soeintenie reine
a fia: कौरवपुण्यलब्धो गजाह्नयात्तीर्थथद: पदानि ।
अन्वाक्रमत् पुण्यचिकीर्षयोर्व्वयाँ स्वधिष्ठितो यानि सहस्रमूर्ति: । १७॥
पुरेषु पुण्योपवनाद्रिकुञ्जेष्पङ्कतोयेषु सरित्सर:सु |
अनन्तलिङ्गे: समलंकृतेषु चचार तीर्थायतनेषुनन्य: 1221
गां पर्यट् मेध्यविविक्तवृत्ति: सदाप्लुतोऽध:शयनोऽवधूत: |
अलक्षिततर स्वैरवधूतवेषो ब्रतानि चेरे हरितोषणानि ।१९।

Vidura said, "Return the share of Yudhisthira, who regards none as his enemy and who
has been tolerating the wrongs done by you, even though they are hard to bear. He is
followed by Bhima, whom you are terribly afraid of, and whowith his younger brothers (Arjuna
and others) is hissing in fury as a serpent. (11) The cause of the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha)
has been espoused by Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) Himself, who is adored
as a deity by Yadava chiefs, who is staying at present in His own capital (Dwaraka) having
conquered big sovereigns, and who has all the Brahmanas and gods on His side. (12) It is
evil incarnate that has entered your house in the person of Duryodhana, whom you are
fostering as a son and who is an enemy of the Supreme Person (Sri Krsna). That is why you
too have turned your face against Sri Krsna and lost your splendour. Therefore, inthe interest
of your race, abandon this unlucky fellow at once." (13) Vidura had a disposition which was
coveted even by saints. But, when he uttered these words on that spot, the anger of
Duryodhana and his companions—Karna, Duhsasana (Duryodhana's younger brother) and
Sakuni (son of Subala and Duryodhana’s maternal uncle )—knew no bounds. Their lips
began to quiver and Duryodhana insultingly interposed :— (14) "Who has called this crooked
son of a maid-servant here ? Hostilely disposed towards the master (myself) on whose
crumbs he has grown fat, he works for the enemy's cause. Although his life may be spared,
he should be banished from my capital at once." (15) Cut to the quick by these most poignant
words, which pierced his ears like shafts, in the presence of his brother (king Dhrtarastra),
but recognizing the greatness of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) Vidura did not feel the
least perturbed in mind and quietly left the palace himself, depositing his bowat the gate. (16)
Vidura, whose birth in the race of Kurus had been secured as a result of great merit (who was
an acquisition to the race of Kuru), departed from Hastinapura and, with a view to acquiring
religious merit, undertook a pilgrimage to all holy places on the earth's surface, sacred to the
Lord whose feet are ever hallowed, and where the Lord resides in a thousand and one forms
(images). (17) Unaccompanied by anyone else, he visited on foot cities, sacred groves,
mountains, bowers, rivers and lakes containing limpid water and holy places graced with the
Lord’s images. (18) He perambulated the earth in the garb of a recluse, so that he could not
be recognized by his own people, lived on pure food such as fruits etc., dropped from trees,
bathed in all sacred waters without exception, slept on the ground, never made his toilet, and
observed vows that pleased Sri Hari.(19)

sa mM भारतमेव at कालेन meagan प्रभासम्
तावच्छशास क्षितिमेकचक्रामेकातपत्रामजितेन पार्थ: 1201
wa शुश्राव ies वनं चथा वेणुजवह्निसंश्रयम् ।
संस्पर्धया दग्धमथानुशोचन् सरस्वतीं प्रत्यगियाय तूष्णीम् । २१।
wa त्रितस्योशानसो मनोश्च पृथोरथाम्नेरसितस्य वायो: ।
तीर्थं सुदासस्य गवां गुहस्य यचच्छाद्धदेवस्य स आसिषेवे 1221
अन्यानि चेह farts: कृतानि नानायतनानि विष्णो: ।
प्रत्यङ्गमुख्याङ्कितमन्दिराणि यद्दर्शनात्कृष्णमनुस्मरन्ति 123 |
