Ors. 19] BOOK ELEVEN 603

न ० व व ROR ERR EE REE कक ESR ROE TOT ROE ROR OTE ER TOR ERO ERE On eR er ere

or the principle of ignorance and inertia) as permeating (all) created beings (from Brahma,
the earliest and foremost of all, down to the merest blade of grass) and further perceives
the one (intelligent principle, viz., the Supreme Spirit) running through them. (14) When
(however) a man no longer perceives as he did before the many (phenomena) as
permeated by the one (reality, viz., Brahma) but sees that one reality only, that alone is
Vijnana to be sure. (In order to perceive this one reality (alone), he should ponder the
coming into existence, continuance and dissolution (i.e., the transitoriness and hence
unreality) of (the many) existences constituted of the three Gunas. (15) That alone should
be concluded to be real, which abides at the beginning as well as at the end (of creation)
and follows from one evolute to another in the middle, and again which remains (as the
residue) in the process of their involution (return to original state). (16) Of the (many)
Pramanas (means of cognition) Sruti texts (negating plurality), direct perception (of an
effect being invariably produced by a cause), tradition and inference—these four are the
most authoritative. Plurality of substances not finding support in the light of these; a
discerning man (realizes the spiritual substance permeating all phenomena to be the only
reality and) recoils from diversity (in the form of this world of matter). (17) Since (all) ritual
acts (which are rewarded with heaven) are transient, a wise man should look upon even
the invisible world, including the realm of Brahma (the creator), as full of misery and
perishable like the visible. (18)
E + प्रीयमाणाय तेऽनघ । ag कथयिष्यामि aa: कारणं परम् । १९॥
श्रद्धामृतकथायां मे हाश्वन्पदनुकीर्तनम्। परिनिष्ठा च पूजायां स्तुतिभि: wad मम । २०।
आदर: परिचर्यार्यां सर्वाङ्गैरभिवन्दनम्। मद्धक्तपूजाभ्यधिका सर्वभूतेषु मन्मति; 1281
Te च वचसा मद्गुणेरणम्।मव्यर्पणं च मनस: सर्वकामविवर्जनम् । २२।
भदर्थेर्थपरित्यागो भोगस्य च सुखस्य wigs at हुतं जप्तं मदर्थं aq wt तप: । २३॥
एवं धर्मैर्मनुष्याणामुद्धवात्मनिवेदिनाम् | मयि सञ्जायते भक्ति: कोऽन्योऽर्थोऽस्यावशिष्यते । २४
The path of Devotion has already been delineated by Me. | shall, however, tell you once
more the royal road to Devotion, since you have developed a liking for it, O sinless one ! (19)
Keenness to hear My nectar-like stories, repeated exposition of My stories when they have
been (duly) heard, intense devotion to (My) worship, and glorifying Me with songs of praise,
enthusiasm in doing service to Me (in the form of sweeping My temple and so on), saluting
Me with all the eight limbs (viz. , the head, breast, hands, knees and feet), offering much more
devoted worship to My devotees andlooking upon all created beings as Myself, directing (all)
the movements of one's body to pursuits intended to propitiate Me (e.g., plucking basil leaves
and flowers etc., for My worship), to utter My praises (alone) with one’s speech, resigning the
mind to Me, and giving up all (one's) desires; spurning for My sake (in order to be able to carry
on My adoration uninterruptedly) wealth as well as the means of enjoyment (luxuries) and
self-gratification, (all of which generally interfere with Devotion) and undertaking sacrificial
performances, practising charity, offering oblations into the sacred fire, muttering prayers,
observing fasts and other sacred vows and (other) austerities (in the form of undergoing
hardships sanctioned by the Sastras) done for My sake—all these are stepping-stones to
Devotion. (20—23) Devotion (consisting in all-absorbing Love for Me, the reward of all
spiritual endeavours) to Me develops, by (following) such righteous courses, in the heart of
men who dedicate (to My service) their (very) self (in the shape of their psychophysical
organism as well as all that is connected with it), O Uddhava ! What other objected remains
for such a devotee to be accomplished ? (In other words, all his objects are accomplished
as a matter of course through Devotion alone.) (24)
