Dis. 8] . BOOK Two'~" द्रा

Bren KKK eceerrert rhe ree reewswret श्र ळ व्याकयो tse ewe ese SAS ee HM et A, Sree trek ttt er i tree

Ayurveda or'the science of medicine) as well as of the Dharma-SaAstra (the books on law),
the Itihasas (epics) and Puranas ? (20) How do the creation, preservation and dissolution
of all beings take place ? And what is the process of performing Vedic rites and works
recommended by the Smrti texts (such as the digging of big and small wells and tanks,
construction of temples to gods and gardens etc., and bestowing food* ) as well as acts
which are prompted by some selfish desire ? Again, what is the unobjectionable method of
Pursuing the three objects of human aspiration (viz., Artha or worldly possessions, Dharma
or religious.merit and Kama or sensuous enjoyment)? (21) How are the Jivas whose
individuality has been merged in Prakrti (Primordial Matter) during a Mahapralaya (the
dissolution of the universe that takes place at the endofa Brahma's life) invested witha body
again ? And how does a heretical doctrine make its appearance? What is meant by the
bondage and emancipation of a soul and, again,what is meant by the soul realizing its true
character ? (22) How does the Lord, who is absolutely independent and all-pervading, sport
with His own Maya and how after throwing off (the veil of) His Maya does He stand
unconcerned as a witness? (23) O great and divine Sage, pray, tell me all this in reality one
after another, since | have approached you with the above questions andhave sought refuge
in you. (24) Youare an authority on these subjects just like the self-born Brahma (the highest
god). Others, however, (blindly) follow only what has been done by the ancestors of those
who have gone before them. (25) Rest assured, O divine sage, that this life of mine is not
going to depart but for (the curse of) the enraged Brahmana, even though | am abstaining
from all food, drinking as | am the nectar (dripping from your mouth) in the form of the Stories
of Lord Acyuta. (26)
Wd उवाच

a samira wan aerenfaft aaa: meet yet sidt feed dae ie!
We AMT AH WU waren weet Masih waReT SUM ec)

चद् यत् परीक्षिदृषभ: पाण्डूनामनुपृच्छति | amquetor तत्सर्वमाख्यातुमुपचक्रमे 129 1
oe areas Hea weal Seca fears yatatitmeisema: 1c |

Sita continued : Thus invited by king Pariksit, who had been rescued in his mother’s
womb by Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) Himself, to narrate the stories of the noble Lord in the midst
of that assembly (of sages), the sage Suka was highly pleased. (27) He expounded the same
Bhagavata-Purana which had been taught by the Lord Himself to Brahma (the Creator) at
the beginning of the Brahmakalpa (the very first Kalpa of the present round of creation), and
which is held in the same esteem as the Vedas. (28) He proceeded to answer seriatim all
the questions that had been asked by Pariksit, the foremost of the scions of Pandu. (29)

Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled "A Statement of Questions"
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana ,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

श्र र्यं et:
CDCI EARS ID

“ वापीकूपतडागादि देवतायतनानि च । अन्नप्रदानमाराम: पूर्तमित्यभिधीयते ॥
(Manusmni IV. 226)
