SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

MERE RHE RRL RN EE RR RE A RL RRR RL RR BRR RE RAH RR eM RR RY HER BHR RR PEE TB RR EW My BE Be RR HE A A

a पदं वचैष्णवमामनन्ति तद् यन्नेति नेतीत्यतदुत्सिसृक्षव: |
विसृज्य दौरात्यमनन्यसौहदा हृदोपगुह्यार्हपदं पदे पदे ।१८|
स्वपाष्णिनाऽऽपीड्य we ततोऽनिलं wry षट्सून्नमयेज्जितकृम: 1१९॥
नाभ्यां स्थितं हृद्यधिरोप्य तस्मादुदानगत्योरसि तं नयेन्मुनि: ।
vie धिया मनस्वी स्वतालुमूलं ङानकैर्नयेत । २०॥
तस्माद् भ्रुवोरन्तरमुन्नयेत निरुद्धसप्तायतनोऽनपेक्ष: |
स्थित्वा मुहूर्तार्धमकुण्ठदृष्टिर्निर्भिद्य मूर्धन् विसृजेत्परं गत: ।२१॥

Dear Pariksit, when the striver intends to leave this body, he should not allow his mind
to get attached to the time and place. Sitting in a steady and easy posture, he should control
his breath and restrain his senses with his mind. (15) Then, controlling his mind with his pure
reason, he should merge his intellect (as wel! as his mind) in the Ksetrajfia ( the conscious
principle in the body), and the Ksetrajfia in the absolute Self. Then, merging the Self in the
Supreme Spirit and attaining final peace, the wise man should abstain from all activity. (1 6)
In that state (of absorption into the Supreme Spirit) Time, which is the Ruler even of gods,
has no power, much less the gods or the creatures that are ruled over by them. There is
neither Sattva nor Rajas nor Tamas in that state, much less the ego or Mahat (the principle
of cosmic intelligence) or Pradhana (Primordial Matter). (17) Bent upon rejecting everything
other than God as ‘not that’, ‘not that' and giving up false self-identification with the body and
things associated with it the Yogis, full of exclusive devotion, embrace with their heart every
moment the adorable form of Lord Visnu. The scriptures are at one in declaring this form as
the supreme essence of the all-pervading Lord. (18) The Yogi whose cravings for sense-
gratification have been completely set at rest by force of wisdom acquired through the
scriptures should drop his body in the following manner. First of all he should squat (on his
seat) pressing the anus with his heels and then, overcoming languor, should draw the air
upwards through the six places (where the six mystical circles are located). (19) The self-
disciplined Yogi should draw the air located in the circle within the navel (known by the name
of Maniptraka) upwards into the Cakra located in the heart (called Anahata); thence,
following the course of the Udana air, he should take it to the circle located above the breast
(known by the name of Viguddhi) and, again, with the help of reason, he should gradually:
push it to the root of the palate (i.e.,to the top of the Visuddhi Cakra). (20) Thereafter, having
closed the seven passages (viz., the two eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils and the mouth),
he should take the air from the root of the palate to the circle located at the middle of the
eyebrows (viz., the Aja Cakra). Then, ifhe has no desire to visit the higher worlds, he should
pause at the Ajfia Cakra for about half an hour with his gaze fixed on his goal and, taking
the air into the Sahasrara Cakra (located at the crown of his head) attain union with God.
Finally, breaking open the crown of his head, he should abandon his body and the
senses. (21)

ae प्रयास्यन् Tou वैहायसानामुत यद् विहारम्।
अष्टाधिपत्यं गुणसन्निवाये सहैव गच्छेन्मनसेन्दियैश्च 122 |
योगेश्वराणां गतिमाहुरन्तर्बहिस्रिलोक्या: पवनान्तरात्मनाम् |
न कर्मभिस्तां गतिमाप्नुवन्ति विद्यातपोयोगसमाधिभाजाम् 123 |
