330 .. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

LHOHLA ARETE HAHAH EE EE Se ee SSE HELE SeEH eae teehee ster aerkesrverhkrerertheoetre ।

पञ्चमे मास्यनुप्राप्ते जितश्वासो नृपात्मज: | ध्यायन् wal पदैकेन तस्थौ स्थाणुरिवाचल: ।७६॥

सर्वतो WA आकृष्य ge भूतेन्द्रियाशायम्।ध्यायन्भगवतो रूपं नाद्राक्षीत्किंचनापरम् ।७७।
आधारॆ महदादीनां प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरम् । ब्रह्म धारयमाणस्य त्रयो लोकाश्चकम्पिरे i921
BS al a fej ८ + = र्र्द्दि Tat |

ननाम त्षत्रार्धमिभेन्द्रधिष्ठिता तरीव सव्येतरत: «9 पदे ।७९।
तस्मिन्नभिध्यायति विश्चमात्मनो at निरुध्यासुमनन्यया धिया ।
went निरुच्छ्वासनिपीडिता yet सलोकपाला: aot ययुर्हरिम् । ८०॥

Maitreya continued: On hearing the message of Narada (the celestial sage), Uttanapada
(the ruler of the world) remained exclusively engrossed in the thought of his son (Dhruva),
neglectful of his royal fortune. (70) There (at Madhuvana) Dhruva bathed (in the Yamuna)
and having remained without food that night and thus purified, he waited upon the Lord with
a concentrated mind according to the sage’s instructions. (71) Eating the Kapittha (wood-
apple) and Badara (jujube) fruit, just enough to keep his body and soul together, at the end
of every three nights, the prince spent one month in worshipping Sri Hari. (72) And likewise
during the second month the child adored the all-pervading Lord, feeding on withered blades
of grass and leaves etc., every sixth day. (73) He spent the third month waiting upon the
glorious Lord through Samadhi (abstract meditation), taking water (alone) every ninth
day.(74) Having (fully) controlled his breath, he fixed his mind and meditated on the
(Supreme) Divinity during the fourth month too, inhaling the air every twelfth day. (75)
When the fifth month commenced, the prince stood motionless like a post on one foot,
contemplating on Brahma (the Absolute) with his breath fully controlled. (76) Withdrawing
his mind, the substratum of the senses and their objects, from all other objects, he fixed it
on the form of the Lord enthroned in the heart and perceived nothing else. (77) All the three
worlds (the earth, heaven and the intermediate region) began to shake as he meditated on
Brahma (the Supreme), the ground of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) and
the other categories, the Ruler of both Pradhana (matter) and Purusa (the spirit). (78) When
the prince (Dhruva) stood on one foot, the earth, pressed by his great toe, leaned to one side
at that spot, even as a boat with a lordly elephant standing in it leans right and left at every
step (as it moves on water). (79) As he contemplated on the Soul of the universe as no other
than himself, stopping his breath as well as (the function of) his senses, all the worlds as well
as their guardian deities resorted for protection to Sri Hari, for they felt much agonized for
want of breath. (80) ॥।

mae तन्नो वृजिनाद्दिमोक्षं om ad त्वां wet awa ।८१।॥

The gods said: O Lord! we had never known before such (a sudden) stoppage of breath
in the case of all living beings, mobile as well as immobile. Rid us, therefore, of this calamity
since we have sought protection with You, who afford shelter to all. (81)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
मा भ्रेष्ठ ae wet दुरत्ययान्निवर्तयिष्ये प्रतियात स्वधाम ।
यतो हि a: soda आसीदोत्तानपादिर्मयि संगतात्मा । ८२।
