Dis. 10] BOOK FIVE 473

BERRA TAAA HHH EHEC RHA SERHRESE EEE ELH HER frininirre int 2 ince tinier . ३३३३ ३...३.३.६..३.।
ज्र्त्त न व व न ज्य व

eyebrows thrown up in the vehemence of extreme indignation and intensity of rage, curved
teeth and wild bloodshot eyes She assumeda most dreadful aspect, as if intending to destroy
the (whole) world, laughed a terrible horse-laugh in great anger and, springing up from the
altar and lopping off the heads of those wicked sinners with the same sword (with which they
were going to behead the Brahmana), drank to satiety along with Her retinue the exceedingly
hot and inebriating blood streaming forth from their necks. Then, overpowered with
intoxication through excessive drink, She sang at the pitch of Her voice along with Her
attendants and also danced and played with the (amputated) heads like balls. (18) Even so
indeed does an act of transgression against exalted souls in the form ofan attemptto kill them
recoils in its entirety upon the offender himself. (19) Nor is this any great wonder, O
Visnudatta (a name of Pariksit, who was so-called because of his having been restored to
life by Lord Visnu Himself appearing in the form of Sri Krsna), that perfect equanimity should
reign even on the eve of being beheaded in the mind of sages who are at the same time
devoted to the Lord, who have succeeded in resolving the exceptionally hard knot existing
in their heart in the form of self-identification with the body, mind and senses etc., who are
friends, nay, the very Self ofall living beings, who bear enmity to none, and who are protected
on all sides by the (ever) vigilant Lord Himself with the help of His equally Vigilant weapon,
the great discus (Sudarsana), and through various forms (such as that of Goddess
Bhadrakali), inasmuch as they have resorted (for protection) to the soles of His feet, where
there is no fear from any quarter. (20)

Thus ends the ninth discourse, forming part of the story of Jadabharata
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

teat hd
re Sirs

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X
The meeting of Jadabharata with king Rahtgana
श्रीशुक उवाच

ag सिन्धुसौवीरपते रहूगणस्य aed इक्षुमत्यास्तटे तत्कुलपतिना शिबिकावाहपुरुघान्वेषणसमये

दॆवनोपसादित: स द्विजवर उपलव्ध एष पीवा युवा संहननाङ्गो गोखरवद्भुरं वाढुमलमिति पूर्वविष्टिगृहीतॆ: सह
गृहीत: प्रसभमतदर्हं उवाह शिबिकां स महानुभाव:। १ |

Sri Suka began again : A (certain) king of the principalities of Sindhu and Sauvira,
Rahugana (by name), was (once) going (in a palanquin to meet the divine sage Kapila to
receive instruction in spiritual knowledge). While looking on the bank of the Iksumati river for
amantoserveas a bearer of his palanquin, the mate of the bearers came across this eminent
Brahmana as pre-arranged by Providence. On the ground that he was stout, young and
muscular and fit to carry a (heavy) load like an ox ora donkey, he was caught hold of by force

along with those already employed to work without any wage, and that highly dignified soul
bore the palanquin, even though he did not deserve such humiliation. (1)

चदा हि द्विजवरस्येषुमात्रावलोकानुगतेर्न समाहिता पुरुषगतिस्तदा विषमगतां स्वशिबिंकां रहूगण
उपधार्यं पुरुषानधिवहत आह हे वोढार: साध्वतिक्रमत किमिति विघममुह्यते यानमिति t 21
When the gait of the (other) men (bearing the palanquin) did not fall in line with that of
