Dis. 6] BOOK TWELVE 687

ESCHER ASHER BREEN FROME MEN AAI ISLE SEB G EIR IRE ER BIA AKER IN RAHA AIRE आआमान्र

Absolute) as shown by you. (5) (Now) give me permission, O Brahmana sage ! । shall control
(all my senses including) speech and, having established my mind, which is free from (all)
cravings, in (the thought of) Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), give up the
ghost. (6) My ignorance (nescience) including its seed has been eradicated by firmness in
Jfiana (the knowledge of truth) and Vijfiana (its Realization) since the:supreme state of the
Lord, which rids (one) of all fear, has been revealed (to me) by you. (7)
सूत उवाच
इत्युक्तस्तमनुज्ञाप्य भगवान् बादरायणि: । जगाम भिक्षुभि: साकं नरदेवेन पूजित: । ८ |
परीक्षिदपि राजर्षिरात्मन्यात्मानमात्मना | समाधाय परं दध्यावस्पन्दासुर्यथा तरु: । ९ ।

wee बर्हिष्यासीनो गङ्गाकूल उदङ्मुख: । ब्रह्मभूतो महायोगी Pager: । १०1
Stata resumed: Thus addressed and worshipped by the king, the divine Sri Suka (son
of Vedavyasa) took leave of him and departed alongwith (other) ascetics. (8) Uniting his mind
by force of reason with the Self, the royal sage Pariksit for his part contemplated on the
Supreme Spirit, remaining breathless like (the trunk of) a tree. (9) With (all) his doubts
resolved, (nay,) identified with Brahma (the Absolute) and free from attachment, the great
Yogi sat down on the bank of the (holy) Ganga facing the north on biades of Kuga grass, the
ends of which pointed to the east. (10)
Tare: प्रहितो विप्रा: क्रुद्धेन द्विजसूनुना । हन्तुकामो qa गच्छन् cael पथि कर्यपम् ee!
तं तर्पयित्वा द्रविणैर्निवर्त्य विषहारिणम्। द्विजरूपप्रतिच्छन्न: कामरूपोऽदरान्नृपम् 1१२॥
ब्रह्मभूतस्य राजर्षेर्देहोऽहिगरलाम्निना | बभूव भस्मसात् सद्य: पश्यतां सर्वदेहिनाम् । १३
हाहाकारो महानासीद् भुवि स्वे fea ada: । विस्मिता ह्यभवन् ad देवासुरनरादय: । १४॥
देवदुन्दुभयो नेदुर्गध्धर्वाप्सरसो जगु:।वव्रृषु: पुष्पवर्षाणि विबुधा: साधुवादिन: । १५

Directed by the infuritated son of a Brahmana and going to (see) the king with the
intention of bitting him to death, O Brahmanas | Taksaka met on the way (a Brahmana
named) Kagyapa. (11) Having gratified Kasyapa, who knew how to counteract the effect of
poison, with gifts of money and sent him back, the serpent, who was capable of assuming
any form at will, and came disguised as a Brahmana (approached and) bit the king. (12) By
the action of fire produced by the poison of the snake the body of the royal sage, who had
become one with Brahma, was instantly reduced to ashes, while all men looked on. (13)
There arose a terrible outcry on earth as well as in the heavens and in ail the quarters; while
gods and demons as well as men andall others were really struck with wonder. (14) Celestial
kettle-drums sounded (of their own accord), Gandharvas and Apsaras (celestial musicians
and dancing girls) sang praises; while gods sent down showers of flowers, raising shouts of
applause. (15)

जनमेजय: स्वपितरं श्रुत्वा तक्षकभक्षितम् । यथा जुहाव संक्रुद्धो नागान् सत्रे सह द्विजै: 1281
सर्पसत्रे समिद्धाम्नौ दह्यमानान् महोरगान्। ges भयसंविग्नस्तक्षक: at ययो ।१७॥
अपश्यंस्तक्षकं त्त्र राजा पारीक्षितो द्विजान्। उवाच तक्षक: कस्मान्न दह्येतोरर्गाधम: (ec
a गोपायति was ae: amanda संस्तम्भित: सर्पस्तस्मान्नाञ्नौ पतत्यसौ ।१९॥
wife sft श्रुत्वा प्राहत्विज उदारधी: । सहेन्द्रस्तक्षको विप्रा नाम्नौ किमिति ued 1२०॥
TSAR: AEA A AGTH पतस्वेह AEA मरुत्वता ।२१॥
इति ब्रह्मोदिताक्षेपै: स्थानादिन्द्र: प्रचालित: । बभूवु: सम्भ्रान्तमति: सविमान: सतक्षक: 1221
तं ow विमानेन सहतक्षकमम्बरात्। विलोक्याङ्गिरस: प्राह राजानं तं बृहस्पति: 123)
