Dis. 4 ] BOOK SEVEN 661

RAR AAR ETH TEER ETE CEH I Ce LTE तीत्री EH HH NE HH RICH EAH BMH जजा व वित्योजा HH चै

such as a Lava (the sixteenth part of the twinkling of an eye). (Nay,) You are the immutable
Self, occupying the most exalted position, birthless and all-pervading, the Life-giver and
Controller of the (entire) animate creation. (31) There is nothing apart from You, cause or
effect, mobile or immobile; nay, all the branches of knowledge (such as the Vedas and
Upavedas) and sciences auxiliary to the Vedas (Grammar and so on) are Your bodies; for
You are (no other than) Brahma (the Infinite) holding the (entire) universe (in the form of a
golden egg) within You, existing beyond Prakrti (consisting of the three Gunas). (32) This
visible universe, O all-pervading Lord, is (nothing but) Your physical Body, with which You
enjoy the objects of the senses, the vital airs and the mind, though continuing in Your most
exalted state; while You are (as a matter of fact) the unmanifest Spirit and the most ancient
Person (the Inner Controller of all). (33) Hail to that almighty Lord (viz., Yourself), endowed
with the faculties of illumination and obscuration (both), by whom in His infinite and
unmanifest state all this stands pervaded. (34) If you will confer on me (my) desired
blessings, O Chiefamong the bestowers of boons, let not my death occur at the hands of (any
of the) living beings created by You, O Lord. (35) Let there be no (fear of) death (to me)
indoors or outdoors, by day or by night, even from anyone else (than those beings of Your
creation) and even through weapons, neither on earth nor in the air and neither from men
nor from animals. Nor should | meet my death at the hands of animate or inanimate beings,
gods, demons or great serpents. (Also be pleased to) grant me the boon of having no
adversary in battle as well as undisputed lordship over (all) embodied beings, (towering)
glory like Your ownin the midst of all the guardians of the spheres and unfailing mystic powers
enjoyed by those who have risen to pre-eminence through austerities and concentration of
mind. (36—38)

Thus ends the third discourse entitled “Hiranyakasipu asks a number of
boons (of Brahma)", in Book Seven of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Puradna, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samihita.

SEES
CDOD RENEE LD OD

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV

Hiranyakasipu's atrocities and Prahrada's virtues recounted
ARG उवाच
एवं वृत: हातधृतिर्हिरण्यकशिपोरथ i प्रादात्तत्तपसा प्रीतो वरांस्तस्य सुदुर्लभान्। १ ।
Narada began again : Thus solicited and pleased with the asceticism of Hiranyakasipu,
Brahma then conferred on him boons which are most difficult to obtain. (1)
ब्रह्मोवाच
तातेमे दुर्लभा: पुंसां यान् वृणीषै वरान् मम । तथापि वितराम्यङ्ग वरान् यदपि दुर्लभान् । २ |
Brahma said : These boons, my child, which you seek of me, cannot be easily secured
by living beings. Nevertheless, | confer (on you), O dear one, those very boons though (so)
difficult to obtain. (2)
ततो जगाम भगवानमोघानुग्रहो विभु:। पूजितोऽसुरवर्येण स्तूयमान: प्रजेश्वरे: । ३ ।
एवं लब्धवरो दैत्यो बिभ्रद्धेममयं वपु:। भगवत्यकरोदु द्वेषं भ्रातुर्वधमनुस्मरन्। ४ |
