556 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

AeA ० ० ७ ० ७ ० ७ ० ORES ७७ ७ ७ ० ७ ० ० ० ० ७० १७ ० ० ० EEE १ ७ ०७ EEE ७ १.७.२.७.७ ७ ७ ७७ २ EEE १ ७ १० ७७ ०७ ०० ७७ ०० ७० ७० ७० ७० २ 4

जायात्मजार्थपशुभृत्यगृहाप्तवर्गान् पुष्णाति यत्प्रियचिकीर्षुतया वितन्वन्।
स्वान्ते सकृच्छ्रमवरुद्धधन: स देह: सृष्ट्वास्य बोजमवसीदति वृक्षधर्मा । २६।
जिह्वैकतोऽमुमपकर्षति कर्हि vat शिश्नोऽन्यतस्त्वगुदरं श्रवणं कुतश्चित्।
घ्राणोऽन्यतश्चपलदृक् क्व च कर्मशक्तिर्बह्व्य: सपत्नथ ga गेहपतिं लुनन्ति। २७
सृष्ट्वा पुराणि विविधान्यजयाऽऽत्मशक्त्या वृक्षान् सरीसृपपशून् खगदंशमत्स्यान्।
तैस्तैरतुष्टहृदय: पुरुषं विधाय ब्रह्मावलोकधिषणं मुदमाप देव:। 2c
लब्ध्वा सुदुर्लभमिदं बहुसम्भवान्ते मानुष्यमर्थदमनित्यमपीह धीर:।
तूर्णं ada न पतेदनुमृत्यु यावन्नि:श्रेयसाय विषय: खलु सर्वत: स्यात्। २९
एवं सजञ्जातवैराग्यो विज्ञानालोक आत्मनि । विचरामि महीमेतां मुक्तसङ्गोऽनहङ्कृति: । 301
न ह्येकस्माद् What सुस्थिरं स्यात् सुपुष्कलम् । ब्रह्मैतदद्वितीयं वै गीयते बअहुधर्षिभि:। ३१॥
One should steady the mind on one thing by controlling it as well as the breath, and
by acquiring a steady pose and remaining vigilant practising dispassion and
concentration. (11) The mind is to be steadied on That One, established in which it slowly
renounce the desire for actions and, developing the Sattva Guna controls the Rajasika and
Tamasika impulses and in their absence attains absorption in contemplation. (12) Just as
the maker of arrows absorbed in his work did not see the king passing by him, so the man
who has concentrated his mind on the Self does not know anything inside or outside. (13)
Again, an ascetic should wander alone, have no fixed abode; and ever vigilant and living in
a cave, unrecognized by obvious marks, he should be without any support and sparing of
speech. (14) For man with his perishable body to build a house is useless and fraught with
great misery. The serpent happily inhabits the hole borrowed by others. (15) The one almighty
Lord, existing by Himself and the support of all, destroys this previously created universe
through His Time-Energy at the end of a Kalpa. And then He remains One alone, quite
undifferentiated. When by force of time, powerful in itself, all the energies in the shape of
the three Gunas get merged in the Unmanifest (when the creation ends), the most ancient
Person, the Lord of Matter and Spirit, attainable by Brahma and other liberated beings,
exists. He remains the absolute and unconditioned, and self-manifest Bliss, fit to be
called Liberation (itself). (16—18) O slayer of enemies, with His own unassisted power He
agitates His Maya, consisting of the three Gunas and first creates Sutra or
Mahattattva. (19) They say that Sutra is the manifestation of the three Gunas, capable of
creating the universe of multifarious forms, through which it runs like a thread and the
individual soul gets into the world. (20) Just as the spider projecting the web from its heart
through mouth, sports with it and then swallows it, so does the Supreme Lord creates,
preserves and destroys the universe. (21) On whatever the embodied being deliberately
centres its mind in its entirety, through love, hatred or fear, it attains that very form. (22) 0
king, the larva confined by the wasp in a hole in the wall and contemplating on the wasp,
without discarding its former body, transforms itself into the latter. (23) O king, । thus learnt
this wisdom from these preceptors. Now hear as | tell You. what | have learnt from my own
body. (24) This body, subject to birth and death and constantly and ultimately a source of
afflictions, is my preceptor as it promotes renunciation and discrimination. Though it helps
me to contemplate on realities, it really belongs to others (who devour it). Realizing this !
wander renouncing all. (25) Man eams money with difficulty in order to enjoy pleasures
and maintain the growing number of wives, children, possessions, cattle, servants, houses
and relations and friends. Like a tree which when ultimately destroyed leaves behind
seed for another tree to grow, he too dies leaving seeds for his next birth. (26) His tongue
drags him to one side, thirst to another and the organ of generation to some other; so do the touch,

