622 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

AMMEN शा श्र ERE शाशा ERENE EET ATETREROR ETRE SEER REE 99 HEATHER HEME

यथाम्भसा प्रचलता तरवोऽपि चला gal चक्षुषा भ्राम्यमाणेन gad भ्रमतीव भू: 1431
यथा मनोरथधियो विषयानुभवो gai स्वप्नदृष्टाश्च adem तथा संसार आत्मन: 14x!
अर्थे ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि deft निवर्तते। ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा ।५५॥
तस्मादुद्धव मा भुङ्क्ष्व विषयानसदिन्दियै: । आत्पाग्रहणनिर्भातं cea वैकल्पिकं भ्रमम् । ५६॥
क्षिप्तोऽवमानितोऽसद्धि: प्रलब्धोऽसूयितोऽथवा । ताडित: सन्निबद्धो वा gen वा परिहापित: । ५७।
निष्ठितो मूत्रितो वाज्ञैर्बहुधैवं प्रकम्पित: | श्रेयस्काम: कृच्छ्रगत आत्मनाऽऽत्मानमुद्धेरेत् ।५८॥

Entry into the womb (in the form of seed), gestation and birth, infancy (extending up to
the age of five), boyhood (extending up to the age of sixteen), youth (extending up to the age
of forty-five), middle age (extending up to the age of sixty), old age and death—these are the
nine states of the body. (46) These states, high and low—brought about by one's own desire
of course—of a body (which is other than the Self) a certain individual soul accepts as one's
own through false identification with Matter: while another with great difficulty disowns them
(by grace of God). (47) One's own birth (including the preceding two states, which cannot be
directly known by oneself) can be inferred from the birth of one's son and death from that of
one's father. The knower of things subject to birth and death can never be subject to birth and
death (himself). (48) He who comes to know the birth (sprouting) of an annual plant from its
seedand its end fromits being shrivelled up after yielding its fruit (in the shape of food-grains),
such a seeris distinct from the plant. Even so the seer of a body (viz., the soul) is distinct from
the body. (Therefore, he who knows these states of the body is not affected by them though
dwelling in the body.) (49) Failing to distinguish the Spirit from Matter in the aforesaid manner
and getting deeply attached to the pleasures of sense as the only reality, the ignorant Jiva
undergoes transmigration. (50) Made to revolve (in the whirligig of metempsychosis) by his
actions, a man attains to the regions of gods and Rsis through application to virtues (born
of Sattvaguna), like control of the mind and the senses to the realm of demons (the
subterranean regions) and human beings (the terrestrial plane) through devotion to lust etc.,
(born of Rajoguna) and descends to the realm of spirits and to the scale of sub-human
creatures (and even immobile creation) through close application to grief andinfatuation etc.,
(born of Tamoguna). (51) Just as aman who sees others dancing and singing (naturally) tries
to imitate them, so the soul, though actionless, is made to follow the movements of the body
etc., prompted by the intellect, when it sees them (and takes theni to be its own). (52) (Just)
as by the side of moving water the trees also appear as though moving, the activity etc., of
the body are reflected in the Self. And (just) as when the eye is made to revolve (alongwith
our body) the earth (around us too) is seen as though revolving (alongwith us), the
excellences attributed to the objects of senses by the perceiving mind appear to existin them,
though not actually existing. (53) (Again) just like the experiences of a reverie or those of a
dream our sense-experiences as well as our identification with the body etc., are false, O
scion of Dasarha ! (54) Even though pleasurable and painful experiences do not belong to
the soul, (suffering entailed by) metempsychosis does not cease for him who dwells on the
pleasures of sense (as something enjoyed by the Self), any more than calamities (which are
anything but real) cease to befall a dreaming man (till he is fully awake). (55) Therefore.
Uddhava, do not enjoy (any more) the pleasures of sense with your vile senses (which are
so difficult to gratify and are sure to lead you to perdition if indulged without restraint). Look
upon the varied experiences (both of the pleasurable and painful type) as illusory and as
reflected in the soul (only) because of our ignorance about its true nature (as the ground of
all experiences). (56) Whether reproached or insulted, ridiculed or belittled, beaten or tightly
bound (with ropes) etc., or deprived of one's means of livelihood, literally spat or u.inated
