240 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23

व RL कौ Bee RE Hy BT BE NT TT BT eT RT ERY TERT TIT RR SR ROR eH न
a

of the Saraswati. (24-25) inside the lake she saw in a house one thousand maids, all in the
prime of youth and emitting the fragrance of a lotus. (26) Seeing her, the damsels suddenly
rose and said to her with joined palms : "We are your maid-servants; tell us what shall we
do for you." (27)
स्नानेन dt महार्हेण स्नापयित्वा मनस्विनीम्।दूकुले निर्मले qa ददुरस्यै च मानदा: irc!
भूषणानि uma वरीयांसि द्युमन्ति च। अन्नं सर्वगुणोपेतं पानं चैवामृतासवम् । २९।॥
अथादर्शो स्वमात्मानं स्रग्विणं विरजाम्बरम्। fat कृतस्वस्त्ययनं कन्याभिर्बहुमानितम् 1301
स्नातॆ कृतरशिर:स्नानं सर्वांभरणभूषितम्।निष्व’त्माव बलयिनं कूजत्काञ्चननूपुरम् । ३१1
श्रोण्योरध्यस्तया ASA काञ्चन्या बहुरत्नया । MO च महार्हेण रुचकेन च भूषितम् ।३२॥
सुदता सुभ्रुवा ween चक्षुषा । पद्मकोरस्पृधा नीलैरलकैश्च लसन्मुखम् ।३३॥
यदा सस्मार ऋषभमृषीणां दयितं पतिम्। तत्र चास्ते सह स्रीभिर्यत्रास्ते a प्रजापति: ।३४॥
wd: पुरस्तादात्मानं स्रीसहस्रवृतं तदा। निशाम्य तद्योगगति der प्रत्यपद्यत । ३५॥

The girls, who showed every respect to the princess, bathed the proud lady with costly
oil, perfumed powder etc., and gave her a pair of new stainless pieces of fine cloth (to cover
her body with), superb, most agreeable and brilliant jewels, food containing all good qualities
and sweet inebriating drinks (other than spirituous liquor). (28-29) Then in a mirror she
beheld (the reflection of) her person rid of dirt, adorned with a garland, cladin unsullied robes,
decorated with auspicious marks and made much of by the maids. (30) Her body had not only
been washed up to the neck* but bathed from head to foot and decked with all kinds of
ornaments, particularly with a gold ornament about her neck, bangles about her wrists and
tinkling anklets of gold (about her ankles). (31) She had a girdle of gold, set with numerous
jewels, about her hips and was further adorned with a precious pearl necklace and
auspicious materials (such as saffron-paste and so on). (32) Her countenance shone with
beautiful rows of teeth, charming eyebrows, eyes distinguished by lovely and soft corners
and vying with lotus-buds, and dark tresses. (33) The moment she thought of her beloved
spouse, the foremost of sages, she found herself along with those damsels just where that

lord of created beings was. (34) She was amazed fo find herself surrounded by a thousand
maids in the presence of her husband and to witness his Yogic power. (35)

a तां कृतमलस्नानां बिभ्राजन्तीमपूर्ववत्। आत्मनो बिभ्रतीं रूपं संवीतरुचिरस्तनीम् 36!
विद्याधरीसहस्रेण सेव्यमानां सुवाससम्।जातभावो विमानं तदारोहयदमित्रहन् । ३७|
बभ्राज उत्कचकुमुद्गणवानपीच्यस्ताराभिरावृत इवोडुपतिर्नभ:स्थ: 3c
fagit द्युधुनिपातशिवस्वनासु रेमे चिरं धनदवल्ललनावस्तथी ise!

The sage perceived that Devahuti had washed herself clean and shone forth as though
she was no longer her former self. She had regained her original beauty, was clad in

excellent robes, her charming breasts duly wrapped round, and was waited upon by a
thousand Vidyadhara girls. He conceived a fondness for her and helped her to ascend the

* The Smrtis make it obligatory for ladies to wash their body up to the neck alone on ordinary days and to bathe from
head to foot only on special days of the week and on festive occasions etc. The former type of ablutionis called 'Malasnana'
or ‘Snana’ while the latter is known by the name of ‘Sirahsnana’. The famous commentator. Vijayadhwaija. quotes the following
Smrti-text in this connection—

eet तु शिर:स्नानमुत्सव स्नातु तैलत: । वारं वा पैतृके क्मंण्यन्यदाऽऽकण्ठसम्प्लवा ॥

