402 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

BE BAR Be et RR Be BL RT HTT He Re Re ती Ft BS wh BOT Rm ee ee Few ee oe & et eT चो जन

long-graceful arms and a winsome countenance perfect in every detail. (45) It has eyes
resembling the petals in the heart of a lotus, captivating eyebrows and a shapely nose, lovely
teeth, ravishing cheeks and mouth, and ears exactly corresponding with each other and
serving as ornaments. (46) With the outer corners of its eyes smiling as it were with
affection. Your form is decked with (flowing) tresses, is covered by a shining fine cloth—
yellow as the filaments of a lotus—and is adorned with a pair of polished ear-rings. (47) It
is (further) graced with a brilliant diadem, bracelets, a pearl necklace, anklets and girdle; and
its glory is heightened by a conch, a discus, a mace, a lotus, a garland (of sylvan flowers)
and gems (of various kinds). (48) It carries about its shoulders, resembling those of a lion,
the lustre of the ear-rings and necklace etc., the Kaustubha gem lending charm to its neck;
and the form is brightened by the bosom, which outshines the touchstone (bearing a streak
of gold on it) by Goddess Sri, ever abiding thereon (in the form of a golden streak). (49) Its
belly, resembling the leaf (of the Indian fig tree in shape), looks (very) attractive with its (three)
folds, which are shaking with the (alternate) inhalation and exhalation of air. By its deep
navel, spiral in shape like whirlpool, it is inviting the universe (as it were) to return (to its
source, the belly). (50) The fine (yellow) loin-cloth and the girdle of gold shine all the more
brightly (by contrast) on the swarthy hips. (Again) the form looks (very) comely by its (pairs
of) beautiful feet, shanks, things and depressed knees, each pair matching perfectly. (51)
With Your feet shining as the petals of an autumnal lotus and driving away the darkness of
our heart by the splendours of their nails, pray, reveal to us that form as Your very essence,
that has dispelled the fear (of Your devotees), O Preceptor (of the universe), since You are
the guide of souls wallowing in ignorance. (52)

। यद्भक्तियोगोऽभयद: स्वधर्ममनुतिष्ठताम् 43 |
भवान् भक्तिमता लभ्यो दुर्लभ: सर्वदेहिनाम् । स्वाराज्यस्याप्यभिमत एकान्तेनात्मविद्गति: । ५४॥
तं दुराराध्यमाराध्यं सतामपि दुरापया | एकान्तभक्त्या को वाञ्छेत्पादमूलं विना बहि: । ५५॥
यत्र निर्बिष्टमरणं कृतान्तो नाभिमन्यते fad विध्वंसयन् वीर्यशौर्यविस्फूर्जितभ्रुवा ue
क्षणार्धेनापि तुलये न wi नापुनर्भवम्।भगवत्सङ्घिसङ्गस्य मर्त्यनां किमुताशिष: । ५७।
अथ।नघाट्ट'घ्रेस्तव्र र्कदैर्तितींर्थयोरन्तबंहि:ख[नव्रिद्यूतपाप्यनाम I
भूतेषनुक्रोशसुसत्त्वशीलिनां स्यात्सङ्गमोऽनुग्रह एष ARE । ५८॥
न ae fed ब्रहिरर्थविभ्रमे तमोगुहायां च विशुद्धमाविशात्।
यद्भक्तियोगानुगृहीतमञ्जसा मुनिर्विचष्टे aA तत्र a गतिम् ।५९॥
we व्यज्यते fad विश्वस्मिन्नवभाति चत्। तत् त्वं aa परं ज्योतिराकाशमिव विस्तृतम् । ६०॥
“This form (of Yours) is worthy of being constantly meditated upon by those who seek
the purification of their mind; for it is the practice of its adoration which brings fearlessness
(in the form of final beatitude) to those who perform their own (allotted) duty (as a stepping-
stone to Devotion). (53) Sought after even by Brahma (who rules over heaven) and the
(ultimate) goal of those who are exclusively devoted to Self-Realization, You are attainable
(only) by him who is full of devotion, and are difficult of access to all (other) mortals. (54)
Having propitiated through exclusive Devotion—hardly attainable even by the virtuous—
You, who cannot be easily propitiated (by any other means), who will seek anything other
than the soles of Your feet ? (55) Though destroying the universe even with his brows
contracted as a token of his majesty and energy, Death does not recognize the soul who has

taken shelter under those feet as subject to his authority. (56) | am not prepared to equate
(the enjoyments of) heaven nor even final beatitude (immunity from rebirth)—much less the

