494 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 87

PREC EE RETRO END शाशा ENE FOOT RT OT AE नशल ग T HOST RANE ERED N ERE HEE

तव of ये चरन्त्यखिलसत्त्वनिकेततया त उत पदाऽऽक्रमन्त्यविगणय्य शिरो निर्ऋते: ।
परिवयसे पशूनिव गिरा विबुधानपि तांस्त्वयि कृतसौहृदा: खलु पुनन्ति न ये विमुखा: 1201
त्वमकरण: स्वराडखिलकारकदाक्तिधरस्तव बलिमुद्वहन्ति समदन्त्यजयानिमिषा: |
वर्षभुजोऽखिलक्षितिपतेरिव विश्वसृजो विदधति यत्र ये त्वधिकृता भवतश्चकिता: । २८॥
स्थिरचरजातय: स्युरजयोत्थनिमित्तयुजो विहर उदीक्षया यदि परस्य विमुक्त तत: ।
न fe परमस्य कश्चिदपरो न परश्च wae वियत इवापदस्य तव BAAR दधत: ।२९॥

All this(objective) universe, consisting of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti)—which is
a projection of the mind (alone)—including the Jiva (which is referred to as the self), though
unreal, appears as real (because of its) being superimposed on You. The knowers of the Self
(however) recognize this entire universe (both subjective and objective) to be real because
of its (being a projection of) their (very) self. Just as those in quest of gold do not reject its
modification (in the shape of gold ornaments) because of its being gold itself, so is this
universe (both in its subjective and objective aspects) concluded (by such knowers of the
Atma) to be their very self inasmuch as it is evolved and interpenetrated (too) by the
Atma.(26) They alone who worship You as the Indweller of all created beings take no
account, and set their foot on the head of, Death. You keep bound (on the other hand) with
the word of God (in the form of the Vedas) as (so many) beasts (with a rope) even the so-
called wise (to their respective duties). Indeed they who have cultivated ove for You (are able
to) purify themselves as well as others; (but) not so they who have turned their face away
from You. (27) Though devoid of organs (of sense etc., in Your formless aspect). You wield
the powers of all the organs, self-dependent as You are (and hence requiring no such
instruments). As the rulers of subcontinents bear tribute to the suzerain Lord of the entire
globe and (at the same time) unreservedly enjoy the tribute collected from their own people,
so do Brahma and others (the creators of the universe) as well as the (other) divinities
(guardians of the various spheres, and those presiding over the ten !ndriyas and mind etc.)
united as they are with Maya (which has no beginning), bear tribute to You and gladly partake
of the oblations offered by human beings (through the sacrificial fire). Afraid of You, they do
that work to which they have been appointed (by You). (This is the form of tribute they bear
to You). (28) When, O Lord who are eternally free, the desire to sport with Maya (which has
no beginning) appears in You, who are beyond that Maya, (the countless) species of mobile
and immobile creatures, endowed with a subtle body made up of the latencies of their
Karmas and brought into existence by Your very look, come into being. To You, who are
untainted like the sky and bear resemblance to the void ( point of subtleness) and are
supreme (in every respect), none is kindred or alien (so that the disparity among created
beings is traceable to the divergence of their Karma and not to any partiality in You) . (29)

अपरिमिता ध्रुवास्तनुभृतो यदि सर्वगतास्तर्हि न झास्यतेति नियमो ga नेतरथा ।
अजनि च यन्मयं तदविमुच्य नियन्तृ भवेत् सममनुजानतां यदमतं मतदुष्टतया ।३०॥
न Wed उद्भ्व: प्रकृतिपूरुषयोरजयोरुभययुजा भवन्त्यसुभृतो जलबुदबुदवत् |
त्वयि a इमे ततो विविधनामगुणै: परमे ofa इवार्णवे मधुनि लिल्युरशोषरसा: 1321

If the Jivas (embodied beings) are (held to be) infinite (in number), everlasting and all-
pervading, their subordination {to another's will) cannot be maintained (because of their
equality with one another as well as with Yourself) any more than Your control over them,
which could be possible (only) in the opposite case (i.e., if they were held to be limited in
number, short-lived and finite), O eternal Lord ! (For) that (Brahma alone) could be the ruler

