194 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

RRR kta AERA RRA EE RSA HEREESL ATE RA SETAC EEA HOHE E EAE EAE EEA Ee HT RE REESE

श्रृण्वीत wae sada aradi जनार्दनोऽस्याशु हृदि प्रसीदति ici
तस्मिन् wad सकलाशिषषां प्रभौ किं दुर्लभं ताभिरलं लवात्मभि: |
अनन्यदृष्ट्या भजतां गुहाशय: wa विधत्ते स्वगतिं पर: पराम् ।४९।
को wa लोके पुरुषार्थसारवित् पुराकथानां भगवत्कथासुधाम्।

आपीय कर्णाञ्जलिभिर्भवापहामहो विरज्येत feat नरेतरम् ।५०॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे वराहपरादुर्भावानुवर्णने त्रयादशोऽध्याय: 123 |

Maitreya resumed : While being thus extolled by those sages through verses closely
resembling the Vedic hymns, the Protector of the universe (in the form of the Boar) placed
the earth on the surface of the water, which supported His hoofs. (46) Having thus placed
on the water the earth, which He had sportfully lifted up from its depths, the almighty Lord
Sri Hari, the Protector of all beings, went out of sight. (47) Lord Janardana is quickly pleased
in His heart of hearts with him who thus listens to or narrates with devotion the blissful and
charming story of Sri Hari, the very thought on whom rids one of all sorrows and sins and
whose sportful activities are all worth recounting. (48) What is hard to obtain when He who
is capable of granting all our desires is pleased? So have done with such blessings as are of
little value. For, on those who adore Him with their mind exclusively fixed on Him, thatsupreme
Lord, who is seated in the heart of all, confers His highest state of His own accord. (49) Having
known the real worth of all the objects of human pursuit and having once quaffed with the
cup of one's ears the nectar of the Lord's stories, sifted from among other old legends—the
nectar which ends the cycle of births and deaths—who in this world would feel surfeited,
unless he is other than a human being? (50)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Three, narrating among other things the
descent of the Divine Boar, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sat १ Pat Oh
PICS Secs

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV

Diti's conception
श्रीरुक Fara
: स owes तमुद्यताञ्जलिर्न afaga विदुरो धृतव्रत: । १ ।

Sri Suka continued : Vidura, who had taken a vow of hearing the Lord's praises, did not
feel satiated even on listening from the mouth of Maitreya (the son of Kugsaru) to the story
of Sri Hari, who had taken the form ofa boar witha special motive (that of rescuing the earth).
With joined palms uplifted he, therefore, questioned the sage again. (1)

fagt sara
ata तु मुनिश्रेष्ठ हरिणा यज्ञमूर्तिना। आदिदैत्यो हिरण्याक्षो हत इत्यनुशुश्रुम । २ ।
