484 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 86

SAAN AAAEM HON ELE RGEE CERT AT MORCEKOPMERNNSHHENEE NE CR NHANEN NENA SKEHTHANATCENTENNEehEn

have been narrated by the revered Sr Suka, sonot Vyasa (himself). He who constantly hears
them or repeats them to others gets his mind fixed in the (almighty) Lord, and attains His
abode of eternal Bliss. (59)

Thus ends the eighty-fifth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna brings back His deceased elder brothers
(from the abode of Bali)", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana. otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

3१५७ १०१3
PII Sirs

अथ षडशीतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXXVI
(Subhadra carried away by Arjuna;) the Lord's Grace on Srutadeva

राजोवाच
wer, वेदितुमिच्छाम: स्वसारं रामकृष्णयो: | यथोपयेमे विजयो या ममासीत् पितामही । १ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted : 0 sage, we desire to know how (my grandfather) Arjuna
married Subhadra, the sister of Balarama and Sri Krsna, who was my grandmother ? (1)
Sy उवाच
अर्जुनस्तीर्थयात्रायां पर्यटन्नवनीं ys । गत: प्रभासमशृणोन्मातुलेयीं A आत्मन: । २ ।
दुर्योधनाय रामस्तां दास्यतीति न चापरे | तल्लिप्सु: स यतिर्भूत्वा त्रिदण्डी द्वारकामगात् | ३ ।
; aa @ orf crarraradia, referers: । पौरै: सभाजितोऽभीक्ष्णं रामेणाजानता च स: । ४ |
Sri Suka replied : (Pariksit,) wandering over the earth in the course of his pilgrimage,
the powerful Arjuna went to Prabhasa and heard (there) of his maternal uncle's daughter
(Subhadra). (2) He further learnt that Balarama would give her away to Duryodhana, but not
others. Eager to win her he went to Dwaraka disquised as a recluse bearing a triple staff
(symbolic of renunciation). (3) There Arjuna spent the four months of the monsoon intent
upon accomplishing his object. He was every now and then honoured by the citizens as well
as by Balarama, who could not identify him. (4)
एकदा गृहमानीय आतिथ्येन निमन्त्य तम्। श्रद्धयोपहतं det बलेन qual किल । ५ ।
Asada aed कन्यां वीरमनोहराम् । प्रीत्युत्फुल्लेक्षणस्तस्यां भावक्षुब्धं मनो दधे । ६ ।
सापि तं चकमे वीक्ष्य नारीणां हृदयङ्गमम्।हसन्ती व्रीडितापाङ्गो तन्न्यस्तहदयेक्षणा । ७ |
a out समनुध्यायन्नन्तरं प्रेप्सुरर्जुन: । न लेभे ज्ञं भ्रमच्चित्त: कामेनातिबलीयसा । ८ |
One day, so it is said, he was invited as a guest by Balarama and brought to the palace,
where he partook of the dishes offered with reverence. (5) There Arjuna saw the youthful
maiden (Subhadra), who captivated the heart of (great) heroes. With his eyes blooming with
joy (at her sight) he set on her his heart agitated with passion. (6) Subhadra too fell in love
with him as soonas she sawhim, ravishing as he did the heart of women. She cast her bashful
glances at him and fixed her heart and eyes on him. (7) Focussing his thought on her alone
Arjuna looked for an opportunity (to run away with her). His mind being distracted by an
overwhelming passion for her, he had no peace of mind. (8)

महत्यां देवयात्रायां रथस्थां दुर्गनिर्शताम्। जहारानुमत: fit: कृष्णस्य च महारथ: 1 ९ ।
