Dis. 5] BOOK SEVEN 669

SIRI RIOT ERO RE nS crotSE ir thn EI Sorin rte inition ttet toi tear tete titer dearer: .३.३.६.७.३.३

The preceptor's son replied : This son of yours, 0 enemy of Indra, is saying something
which has neither been taught by me nor by anyone else. This view is natural with him, O
king! (Pray,) curb your anger and do not lay the blame at our door. (28)

ARG उवाच
गुरुणैवं प्रतिप्रोक्तो भूय आहासुर: सुतम्। न चेद्गुरुमुखीयं ते कुतोऽभद्रासती मति: । २९॥
Narada resumed : Thus replied to by the preceptor, the demon addressed his son

(Prahrada) again: "If this vicious idea of your's has not been imbibed from the mouth of your
preceptor, whence has it come, O inauspicious one?” (29)

Yelq उवाच

मतिर्न कृष्णे परत: स्वतो वा मिथोऽभिपद्येत गृहव्रतानाम् ।

अदान्तगोभिर्विशतां तमिस्रं पुन: पुनश्चर्वितचर्वणानाम् 1301

न oa fag: स्वार्थगतिं fe विष्णुं दुराशया ये बअहिरर्थमानिन: |

अन्धा यथान्धैरुपनीयमाना वाचीशतन्त्यामुरुदाम्नि बद्धा: 1321

Prahrada submitted : The mind of those who are devoted to their home (worldly

activity), (Nay,) who (repeatedly) fall into the hell-like whirlpool of transmigration because of
their unsubdued senses and are engaged in enjoying over and over again the pleasures they
have already enjoyed (in this as well as in previous lives), does not get attached to Lord Sri
Krsna either by itself or through (the exhortation of) others or (even) through mutual efforts.
(30) Indeed they whose mind is impure (attached to the pleasures of sense) and who, like
the blind led by another blind man, esteem (only) those regarding the external (worldly)
objects as their (only) aim (in life) are unable to realize Lord Visnu, the goal of those who
recognize Him as the supreme object. (On the other hand,) through actions (done from
interested motives) they remain bound (like so many oxen) to the rope of the Lord, in the
shape of His Word (the Veda), with numerous (individual) strings in the shape of different
denominations (Brahmana and so on).(31) The mind of these (people) fails to approach the
feet of Lord Visnu (possessed of infinite strength)—the object of approaching which is to get
rid of evil (in the form of transmigration) —so long as it does not seek a bath in the dust of
feet of exalted souls who claim nothing as their own. (32)

इत्युक्त्वोपरतं «= oa हिरण्यकशिपू रुषा। अन्धीकृतात्मा स्वोत्सङ्गान्निरस्यत महीतले 1331
आहामर्षरुषाविष्ट॥ कषायीभूतलोचन: ।।वध्यतामाश्वयं ge नि:सारयत aha: । ३४॥

अयं मे भ्रातृहा सोऽयं feat स्वान् सुहृदोऽधम: | पितृव्यहन्तुर्यर पादौ विष्णोर्दासवदर्चति । ३५॥
विष्णोर्वा साध्वसौ किं नु करिष्यत्यसमञ्जस: । ated दुस्त्यजं पित्रोरहाद्य: पञ्चहायन: ।३६॥

फो त द्दि a = x 1 it stea: \
foamy यदुतात्मनोऽहितं at qd जीवति यद्बिवर्जनात् । ३७॥
Hiranyakasipu, whose intellecthadbeenblinded by wrath, threw his son (Prahrada) from
his lap to the ground as soon as the latter stopped after uttering the aforesaid words. (33)
Possessed by indignation and anger, and with bloods-shot eyes he exclaimed, "Let this boy
be killed at once, deserving of death as he is ! Turn him out, O Raksasas ! (34) (Surely) he
is responsible for the death of my brother (Hiranyaksa); (for) it is this vile fellow who,
