Dis. 12 ] BOOK TWELVE 719

SIAR RAHA AM AAA ARGH A STH RR BARRAGE AEA ABSA BBA SAA RAR H RAAT AD ARTE BAR RO

Be जृम्भणं युद्धे बाणस्य भुजकृन्तनम्। प्राग्ज्योतिषपतिं हत्वा कन्यानां हरणं च यत् । ३८।
चैद्यपौण्ड्रकशाल्वानां दन्तवक्त्रस्य दुर्मते: tena द्विविद: पीठो मुर: पञ्चजनादय: ।३९।
Aa च वधस्तेषां वाराणस्याश्च दाहनम्। भारावतरणं भूमेर्निमित्तीकृत्य पाण्डवान् Ivo!

. [twas in this line that the almighty Lord of the universe took His descent under the name of
SriKrsna. His appearance in the house of Vasudeva and then how He was brought up in Gokula. (27)
Here are recounted the (many) exploits of that Enemy of the Asuras—which are as a matter of
fact) endless (in number as well as in extent)—how He (even) as a babe drank away the (very)
life of the demoness Putana alongwith the milk of her breasts and upturneda cart (and destroyed
the demon Utkaca who had entered the cart in a disembodied state). (28) How (the demon)
Trnavarta (who appeared in the form of a whirlwind) was crushed to death as well as the death
of (the demons) Baka and Vatsa (who remained disguised as a heron and a calf respectively) and
the destruction of Dhenuka (who had assumed the guise of a donkey) alongwith his kindred and
that of Pralamba (who came disguised as a cowherd boy). (29) Deliverance of thecowherds from
a forest conflagration thatcame rushing from all sides; subjugation of the serpent Kaliya and the
rescue of Nanda (the Lord’s own father) from (the grip of) a boa-constrictor. (0) How the maidens
(of Vraja) observed a sacred vow (of bathing in the Yamuna in winter and worshipping Goddess
Katyayani on its sandy bank fora month in order to scoure the Lord for their husbang), in the course
of which the immortal Lord was pleased with their observances (and conferred on them a boon);
the Lord's grace on the wives of certain Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice and the remorse of
the Brahmanas (for their failure to recognize the Lord and pay their homage to Him). (31) The
uplifting of Mount Govardhana (in order to save Vraja from the fury of Indra, who sent devastating
showers with intent to submerge the tract of Vraja) and how later on (on recognizing His divinity)
Indra (the rain-god) and the cow of plenty worshipped the Lord and bathed Him (with milk); His
pastimes with the damseis (of Vraja) through (many) nights. (32) The destruction of the evil-minded
(Yaksa) Sarikhactida (who carried away a number of damsels in the midst of their pastimes with
the Lord), as well as of (the demons) Arista and Kesi (that had assumed the disguise of a bull and
a horse respectively); Akrura's visit (to Vraja to take Sri Krsna and Balarama to Mathura under
Karhsa's invitation) and the subsequent departure of Balarama and SriKrsna (for Mathura). (33)
The wailing of the women of Vraja (over their separation from Sri Krsna) and then how the two
(divine) Brothers saw Mathura and killed (atthe bow-sacrifice) the elephant (Kuvalayapida) as well
as (the wrestlers) Mustika and Cantira and (finally) Karnsa (the wicked king of Mathura himself)
and others (his eight brothers). (34) How He brought back the dead son of His teacher Sandipani
and the good offices that were rendered to the Yadavaclan by SriKrsna while staying at Mathura
accompanied by Uddhava and Balarama, O Brahmana sages ! (35) Extermination of the armies
led by Jarasandha (Karhsa’s father-in-law and ally) many (seventeen) times; and how the Lord
caused the destruction of the king of Yavanas (through Mucukunda) and founded (the city of)
Kusasthall (Dwaraka). (36) How Sri Hari brought a Parijata (a celestial tree) as well as (the
council-chamber named) Sudharma from paradise (the realm of the gods) and carried off
Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) after crushing the enemies in battle. (37) How, when Lord Siva
(the god of destruction and the protector of Banasura) began to yawn in battle (when assailed by
the Lord with a Jrmbhanastra during the invasion of Sonitapura, the capital of Banasura, by the Lord
consequent on the capture of His grandson, Aniruddha, at the hands of the demon), the Lord
lopped off the arms of Banasura (thus leftunprotected) and, having made short work of the demon
Naraka (the ruler of Pragjyotisapura in Assam), took away (and married) the (sixteen thousand
and odd) maidens (detained in his palace by the demon). (38) A description of the (redoubtable)
might and destruction of King Sigupala, Paundraka and Salva, of the evil-minded Dantavaktra,
as well as of Dwivida (a monkey) and the demons Sambara (who stole away the Lord's eldest son,
Pradyumna, as soon as born, from the very lying-in-chamber), Pitha, Mura, Paficajana and
others and how the Lord set (the city of) Varanasi on fire and (further) relieved the earth’s
burden, making the sons of Pandu His instruments. (39-40) (Here ends the theme of Book Ten.)
