582 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7
..७.३.३.३.३.३..३.४.३.३.७..७.७.७.३.३.७.३. ३७८३ ८७३७ ७.७.१२.२. ६६७२ २३3 ६28 8३3 ६..६. ६ 3३३2 8833 3.3. ६82३ 2 8 32२३ . 3 ३ ३६३३ SHEATH:
examination ) that the human species was evolved by Brahma (the creator). (42) Pisa (the
third son of Aditi), who had his teeth broken of yore because he had shown his teeth and
laughed at Rudra seeing him angry at Daksa (vide IV. v. 21) and consequently lived on flour
(vide IV. vii. 4), remained without issue. (43) A girl, Racana by name, who was a younger
sister of the Daityas (the sons of Diti, whose account will follow in Discourse xviii below);
became the wife of Twasta. Of the aforesaid couple, were born (two sons,) Sannivesa and
the powerful Viswartpa. (44) The hosts of gods (unanimously) chose ViSwartpa for their
preceptor—even though he was a nephew (sister's son) of their (sworn) enemies (the
Daityas)—inasmuch as they had been deserted by their (own) teacher, the sage Brhaspati
(son of Angira), who was insulted by them. (45)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, in Book Six of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

+ pIeISEEN Si ese

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII
Deserted by the sage Brhaspati, the god choose
Viswaripa for their preceptor
राजोवाच
कस्य हेतो: परित्यक्ता आचार्येणात्मन: सुरा: | एतदाचक्ष्व भगवञ्छिष्याणामक्रमं गुरौ । १ ।
The king (Pariksit) said : For what reason were the gods forsaken by their own

preceptor (the sage Brhaspati)? (Kindly tell me, O glorious sage, the transgression made
by the disciples with respect to their preceptor, which brought matters to such a pass. (1)

श्रीरुक उवाच
इन्द्रस्रिभुवनैश्वर्यमदोल्लङ्घितसत्पथ: | मरुद्भिर्वसुभी रुद्रैरादित्यैर्ऋभुभिर्नृप । २ |
विश्वेदेवैश्च साध्यैश्च नासत्याभ्यां परिश्रित: | सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: । ३ ।
विद्याधराप्सरोभिश्च frat: पतगोरगै: | निषेव्यमाणो मघवान् स्तूयमानंश्च भारत x |
उपगीयमानो ललितमास्थानाध्यासनाश्रित: | पाण्डुरेणातपत्रेण चन्द्रमण्डलचारुणा । ५ ।
युक्तश्चान्यै: पारमेष्ठयैश्चामरव्यजनादिभि: | विराजमान: पौलोम्या सहार्धासनया yar & |
स यदा परमाचार्यं देवानामात्मनश्च ह।नाभ्यनन्दत संप्राप्तं प्रत्युत्थानासनादिभि: । ७ ।
वाचस्पतिं मुनिवरं सुरासुरनमस्कृतम्।नोच्चचालासनादिन्द्र: पह्यन्नपि सभागतम् । ८ |
ततो निर्गत्य सहसा कविराङ्गिरस: wy: | आययो स्वगृहं तूष्णीं विद्वान् श्रीमदविक्रियाम् । ९ ।

Sri Suka replied : Indra, who had transgressed the path frequented by the virtuous
through arrogance caused by the lordship of the worlds, O king (Pariksit), was (one day)
seated on the throne in his court, surrounded by the Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods), the
(eight) Vasus, the (eleven) Rudras, the (other) Adityas (sons of Aditi), (the classes of gods

known as) the Rbhus, the ViSwedevas and the Sadhyas, as well as by the (twin-born)
Aswinikumaras (the celestial physicians). The (great) Maghava (another name of Indra)
