—=

Dis. 83 ] BOOK TEN 469

7 fete परिधाय च कौझिकाग्र्ये सव्रीडहासवदना कबरीधृतस्रक 1201

उन्नीय ववक्त्रमुरुकुन्तलकुण्डलत्विड गण्डस्थलं शिझशिरहासकटाक्षमोक्षै: |

राज्ञो निरीक्ष्य परित: ङनकैर्मुरारेरंसेऽनुरक्तहदया निदधे स्वमालाम् ।२९॥
तावन्मृदङ्गपटहा: शङ्खभेर्यानकादय: । निनेदुर्नटनर्तक्यो मनृतुर्गायका जगु: 1301

(O queen !) the pride of the proudest of princes having thus been crushed, most of the
kings retumed to their seats (giving up all hopes of winning me). It was then that the almighty
Lord took up the bow, strung it sportfully, joined the arrow to it, and looking but once at the
reflection of the fish pierced it by His shaft and brought it down to the ground. The sun was
at the meridian at that time. (25-26) (O good Draupadi !) shouts of victory were raised all over
the earth while celestia! drums began to sound in the heavens and gods transported with joy
showered flowers. (27) (O queen !) । entered the arena at that moment, with the anklets at
my feet sweetly jingling. | wore round my loins a new piece of finest silk and had wrapped
myself with another. With flowers adorning my braid and bashful smiles on my lips, | carried
in my hands a brilliant necklace of jewels wrought in gold. (28) Thick tresses of hair overhung
my face and brilliant ear-rings added lustre to my cheeks. Lifting up my face | glanced at the
kings on all sides with enlivening smiles and sidelong looks and with a heart over-flowing with
love gently placed the necklace round the neck of my Lord. (29) The moment | placed the
necklace round His neck, clay tomtoms, tabors, conchs, drums and kettledrums were
sounded; male and female dancers began to dance, and songsters began to sing (in various
tunes). (30)

एवं वृते भगवति wa नृपयूथपा: । न af याज्ञसेनि स्पर्धन्तो हृच्छयातुरा: 13%!
मा तावद् रथमारोप्य हयरत्नचतुष्टयम्।शार्ङ्गमुद्यम्य सन्नद्धस्तस्थावाजौ चतुर्भुज: ।३२॥
दारुकश्चोदयामास काञ्चनोपस्करं रथम्।मिघतां भूभुजां राज्ञि मृगाणां मृगराडिव ।३३॥
तेऽन्वसज्जन्त राजन्या freq पथि sari संयत्ता उद्धृतेष्वासा ग्रामसिंहा यथा हरिम् । ३४॥

a शार्ङ्गच्युतवाणौघै: कृत्तबाह्वङ्ध्रिकन्धरा: | faq. प्रधने केचिदेके सन्त्यज्य दुद्गुवु: 134!

Draupadi ! when | thus chose my beloved Lord as my life’s partner, the other love-lorn
monarchs grew (extremely) jealous and were very much upset at their discomfiture. (31) In
the meanwhile my Lord, possessed of four arms, (at once) placed me on His chariot drawn
by four excellent horses and, lifting up His bow and putting on His armour stood prepared
for battle. (32) Daruka drove the chariot decorated with gold as all the kings looked on, O
queen, and the Lord proceeded to Dwaraka even as the lion passes through a herd of
deer.(33) Lifting up their bows and prepared for a battle, some of those kings pursued my
Lord with a view to obstructing Himon the way; but their attempt was no more successful than
that of dogs to check the lion. (34) Some of them fell in battle, their arms, legs and necks being
torn asunder by the arrows discharged from the Sarnga bow of the Lord; while others
abandoning the fight took to their heels. (35)

aa: पुरीं यदुपतिरत्यलङ्कृतां रविच्छदध्वजपटचित्रतोरणाम् |

कुञस्थलीं दिवि भुवि चाभिसंस्तुतां समाविशात्तरणिरिव स्वकेतनम् ।३६॥
पिता मे पूजयामास सुहृत्सम्बन्धिबान्धवान्। महार्हवासोऽलङ्कारै: शय्यासनपरिच्छदै: ।३७॥
आत्मारामस्य तस्येमा वयं a गृहदासिका: । सर्वसङ्गनिवृत्तयाद्धा तपसा च बभूविम । ३९॥

