Dis. 1] BOOK FOUR । 291

६...६...३.६.३.८.३.३.३.३..३..६८३.३:३ Rh ee te Hhhtrtrererwererey LAKEARETH HEME HHH EES Sa tthe rere ee tik te He ett

अथास्मदंशभूतास्ते आत्मजा लोकविश्रुता: । भवितारोऽङ्ग भद्रं ते विस्रप्स्यन्ति च ते यश: ।३१॥

The Deities ऽवांत: ^ऽ you willed, precisely so it must happen; it could not be otherwise.
For it was your will, O Brahmana—you, who are So true of resolve. We three (taken together)
represent the truth on which you contemplated. (30) Now there will be born to you, may you
be blessed, three sons embodying our rays, who will themselves be celebrated throughout
the world; O-dear sage, and shall spread your fame too. (31)

wa यक्षपतिर्देव: कुबेरस्तिडविडासुत: | रावण: कुम्भकर्णश्च तथान्यस्यां विभीषण: । ३७॥
पुलहस्य गतिर्भार्या त्रीनसूत सती सुतान्। कर्मश्रेष्ठं वरीयांसं सहिष्णुं च महामते ।३८॥
क्रतोरपि क्रिया भार्या वरालखिल्यानसूयत | ऋषीन्षष्टिसहस्राणि ज्वलतो ब्रह्मतेजसा 13° |
ऊर्जायां जज्ञिरे पुत्रा वसिष्ठस्य परंतप | चित्रकेतुप्रधानास्ते सप्त ब्रह्मर्षयोऽमला: xo
चित्रकेतु: सुरोचिश्च विरजा fia एव ai seat वसुभूद्यानो द्युमान् शक्त्यादयोऽपरे ve
चित्तिस्त्वधर्वण: wt oY पुत्रं धृतव्रतम्। दध्यञ्चमश्वश्चिरसं pict निबोध मे ।४२॥
Having thus granted the boon soughtafter by him, and duly worshipped by the Brahmana
couple (Atri and his wife), the three Rulers of the gods returned thence (each to His own
abode) even as the couple stood looking on with wide open eyes. (32) The moon-god was
born with a portion of Brahma, while Dattatreya, a Master of Yoga, appeared with a ray of
Lord Visnu and the sage Durvasa represented a portion of Lord Sankara. (Now) hear of the
progeny of the sage Angira (another mind-born sonof Brahma). (33) Angira's wife, Sraddha,
gave birth to four daughters—Sinivali, Kuh and Raka, Anumati being the fourth.* (34)
Besides these, they had a couple of sons too, who attained celebrity in the Swarocisa(next)
Manvantara—the really worshipful Utathya and the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the
gods), who was the foremost of the knowers of Brahma. (35) Pulastya (the fourth mind-born
son of Brahma) begot through his wife, Havirbhd, the sage Agastya, who took the form of
the gastral fire in his next incarnation; and the great ascetic Visrava was his second son. (36)
Of the latter was born the (celebrated) god Kubera (the god of riches), the lord of the Yaksas
(a class of demigods), son of Idavida; while (the world-renowned demons) Ravana,
Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana were born to his other wife (KeSini). (37) Pulaha's virtuous wife,
Gati, bore three sons—Karmasgrestha, Variyan and Sahisnu, O talented Vidura. (38) Even
so Kratu’s wife, Kriya, brought forth sixty-thousand sages collectively known as the
Valakhilyas, all burning with spiritual glow appropriate to a Brahmana. (39) By (his wife) Grja,
O chastiser of enemies, Vasistha (the seventh son of Brahma) had seven sons, Citraketu
and others, who all turned out to be pure-hearted Brahmana sages. (40) They were Citraketu,
Suroci, Viraja, Mitra, Ulbana, Vasubhrdyana and Dyuman. He had other sons too, Sakti and
so on (by another wife). (41) Atharva’s wife, citti (Santi), got a son, Dadhici, also known

* Of the four daughters of Angira, and Sraddha, Sinivall is the deity presiding over the fourteenth day of a dark fortnight,
while Kuhd presides over the fifteenth: even so Raka presides over the full-moon day and Anumati over the fourteenth day of
every bright fortnight.
