634 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

PRR PAA EAHA AMEN HSCS EECCA TREES HE SCREENS HEHE ECE HEHE H HHA OHH OOH RH

Sri Suka went on: Onhearing this speech of Lord Siva, Goddess Uma (Parvati), O king
(Pariksit), was freed from astonishment and felt pacified in mind. (36) Though fully capable
of pronouncing a counter-curse, Citraketu (a devotee of the Lord) accepted the curse of the
divine lady with reverence. Such (ideal non-violence) is the characteristic of a pious soul. (37)
Hurled into the demoniac species, he sprang up from the sacred fire, called Daksinagni, of
the god Twasta and became known as Vrira, (still) endowed with spiritual knowledge and
wisdom. (38) | have thus told you all that you inquired of me, viz., the cause of Vrtra's birth
as a demon and what accounted for his devotion to the Lord. (39) By listening to this sacred
episode of the high-souled Citraketu, revealing the glory of the votaries of Lord Visnu, one
is completely rid of (the) bondage (of mundane existence). (40) Rising (early) in the morning,
he who recites this episode with reverence, remaining silent (refraining from all other talk)
and remembering Sri Hari (all the time), attains the supreme goal. (41)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "Citraketu cursea”,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SEPT INTE:
त्ज्जर्त्त

अथाष्टादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVIII
An account of the birth of the Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods)
श्रीगुक उवाच

garg vet सवितु: सावित्रीं व्याहतिं त्रयीम् । अग्निहोत्रं uel सोमं चातुर्मास्यं महामखान्। १ |
सिद्धिर्भगस्य भार्याङ्ग महिमानं fay प्रभुम्। आशिषं च वरारोहां कन्यां प्रासूत सुव्रताम् । २ ।
धातु: कुहू: सिनीवाली राका चानुमतिस्तथा | सायं दर्शमथ प्रात: पूर्णमासमनुक्रमात् | ३ |
अग्नीन् पुरीष्यानाधत्त क्रियायां समनन्तर: | चर्षणी वरुणस्यासीद्यस्यां जातो भृगु: पुन: । ४ |
वाल्मीकिश्च महायोगी वल्मीकादभवत्किल । अगस्त्यश्च वसिष्ठश्च मित्रावरुणयोर्ऋषी । ५ ।
Ya: सिषिचतु: कुम्भे उर्वह्या: सन्निधो द्रुतम् । रेवत्यां fa उत्सर्गमरिष्टं पिप्पलं व्यधात् । ६ ।
पौलोम्यामिन्द्र area त्रीन् पुत्रानिति a: श्रुतम् । जयन्तमृषभं तात तृतीयं मीढुषं प्रभु: । ७ ।
उरुक्रमस्य देवस्य मायावामनरूपिण: | कीर्तौ oes बृहच्छ्लोकस्तस्यासन् सोभगादय: । ८ |
तत्कर्मगुणवीर्याणि काङ्यपस्य महात्मन: । पश्चाद्वक्ष्यामहेऽदित्यां यथा Sada ह । ९ ।

Sri Suka began again : Préni, the spouse of Savita (the fifth of the twelve sons of Aditi,
the progeny of the first four—viz., Vivaswan, Aryama, Pusa and Twasta—having already
been dealt with in the foregoing discourses), brought forth (three daughters,) Savitri (the
deity presiding over the holy Gayatri-Mantra), Vyahrti (the deity presiding over the three
mystical syllables, Bhah, Bhuvah and Swah prefixed to the said Gayatri-Mantra while
repeating it and severally denoting the three worlds—earth, the intermediate region and
heaven) and Trayi (the deity presiding over the rituals, the subject-matter of the three
Vedas—Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda) and (nine sons, viz.,) Agnihotra (the deity

presiding over the act of offering oblations into the sacred fire), Pasu (the deity presiding over
animal sacrifices), Soma (the deity presiding over a Soma sacrifice), Caturmasya (the deity
