486 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

न्दि विज्जक कक KCK क HERA KEY डि क LE LRH HER TEER REEH EE OHH EEE HEE र्ध्वयो कौ ङ HEE HET चो
ज्र्त्त

Realization), leading to the (other) extremity of the road. (14) (Even great) heroes, who have
completely subdued the great elephants guarding the quarters as well as the four intervening
corners, all bite the dust on the field of battle, having contracted confirmed hostility with one
another for the sake of (dominion over) the earth, claiming it as their own. None of them,
however, attains the goal which is reached by the recluse (who has completely shaken off
all forms of violence and) who is free from enmity. (15)

प्रसज्जति क्वापि लताभुजाश्रयस्तदाश्रयाव्यक्तपदद्विजस्पृह: |
क्वचित्कदाचिद्धरिचक्रतस्त्रसन् सख्यं fet वचककङ्कगृध्रै:। १६॥
तज्जातिरासेन सुनिर्वृतेन्द्रिय: परस्परोद्बीक्षणविस्मृतावधि: | १७॥
द्रुमेषु रंस्यन् सुतदारवत्सलो व्यवायदीनो विवश: स्ववन्धने।
क्वचित्प्रमादाद्गिरिकन्दरे पतन् वल्लीं गृहीत्वा गजभीत आस्थित:। १८
अत: कथञ्चित्स विमुक्त sme: पुनश्च सार्थं प्रविशत्यरिन्दम।
अध्वन्यमुष्मिननजया निवेशितो भ्रमञ्जनोऽद्यापि न ae कश्चन।१९।
रहूगण त्वमपि ह्यध्वनोऽस्य संन्यस्तदण्ड: कृतभूतमैत्र:।
असज्जितात्मा हरिसेवया शितं ज्ञानासिमादाय तरातिपारम्। Ro |

Clinging to the arms (tiny shoots) of creepers and full of longing for sweetly warbling birds
perched on them, they get strongly attached to some (unknown) place. And sometimes
afraid of tigers, they make friends here with cranes, herons and vultures. (16) Betrayed by
them, they seek to join a flock of swans; but, not finding their behaviour to their liking, they
approach monkeys and, their senses being fully gratified with the amorous sports natural to
the race, each pair get so absorbed in looking at each other's face that they forget (even) their
(fast approaching) death. (17) Seeking delight in trees and fond of sons and wife, they are
(ever) impatient with the animal desire for sexual indulgence and powerless to get rid of their
bondage. When falling into some ravine through inadvertence, (a stray member of) this
company catches hold of some creeper and remains suspended by it, afraid of the elephant
(below). (18) Somehow extricated from this calamity, however, he joins the company once
more, Ochastiser of foes ! No one put on this track by Maya (the deluding potency of the Lord,
that has no beginning), and wandering (along it) is able to cognize the supreme object of life
even to this day. (19) You too have been put on this track, O Rahtgana; (therefore)
completely abjuring (all forms of) violence and making friends with all living beings, do you
take up the sword of wisdom, sharpened with the worship of Sri Hari and with a mind
unattached to the pleasures of sense get to the (other) end of this road. (20)

१}

राजावाच
४] यद्धृषीकाप्यशङ्कृग्त्मना महात्मनां व: WER: समागम:। २१।
न ह्यद्भुतं त्वच्चरणाब्जरेणुभिर्हतांहसो भक्तिरधोक्षजेऽमला।
मौहूर्तिकाद्यस्य समागमाच्च मे दुस्तर्कमूलोऽपहतोऽविवेक:।२२॥
नमो महद्भ्योऽस्तु नम: शिशुभ्यो नमो युवभ्यो नम आ वदटुभ्य:।
a mem गामवधूतलिङ्गाश्चरन्ति aa: शिवमस्तु राज्ञाम्।२३॥
The king (RahGgana) said : Oh, (this) human birth is the best of all (other) incarnations.
Of what avail are births of the highest order in heaven, where the fellowship of exalted souls
