Dis. 22 ] “BOOK FOUR ` 391'

RR Me He Hr Be Re EI ES EE इ क Ws SPS जोत्र ATT RT Ee क्त A क ड ती

experienced in crossing the ocean of metempsychosis—which is infested with (fierce)
crocodiles in the shape of the five senses and the mind—by those who have not found their
boat in God, inasmuch as they seek to reach the other end of it by painful means (such as
the practice of Yoga). Therefore, you make the adorable feet of Lord Sri Hari your boat and
cross the ocean of misery, which is so difficult to cross. (40)

WAY उवाच
स एवं ब्रह्मपुत्रेण कुमारेणात्ममेधसा । दर्शितात्मगति: सम्यक्त्रशस्योवाच तं नृप: ।४१॥

Maitreya resumed: Enlightened thus about the true nature of the Self by Sanatkumara,
son of Brahma (the creator) and a knower of Brahma, the king duly praised him and
addressed him (as follows). (41)

१३
अ

dasa: पूर्वं हरिणाऽऽर्तानुकम्पिना। तमापादयितुं Ae भगवन् यूयमागता: 1821
निष्पादितश्च कात्स्येन भगवद्भिर्घृणालुभि: । साधूच्छिष्टं fe मे सर्वमात्मना सह fH ददे । ४३1
प्राणा दारा: सुता ब्रह्मन् गृहाश्च सपरिच्छदा: । राज्यं ae मही ara इति wad निवेदितम् ।४४॥
सैनापत्यं Tw च दण्डनेतृत्वमेव च सर्वलोकाधिपत्यं च वेदशास्त्रविदर्हति ivy
waa ब्राह्मणो ys स्वं वस्ते स्वं ददाति च । तस्यैवानुग्रहेणान्नं भुञ्जते क्षत्रियादय: ive!
तुष्यन्त्वदभ्रकरुणा: स्वकृतेन नित्यं को am तत्प्रतिकरोति विनोदपात्रम् isl
The king said : Sri Hari, who is (so) kind to the afflicted, showed His grace to me in the
first instance (vide Discourse XX above). It is in order to bring it to its culminating point, O
divine sage, that you have all come (here). (42) And compassionate as you are, it has been
made fruitful in its entirety by you. What shall | give you (in return for this grace), when
everything belonging to me, including myself, has been graciously allowed (as a favour) to
me by pious souls? (43) My life, spouse, sons and house with allits appurtenances, kingdom,
army, lands and treasury—all this | offer (at your feet as something already belonging to
you). (44) He alone whois well-versed in the Vedas and (other) sacred books is competent
to commandarmies, rule over akingdom, direct policies of war and exercise dominion over
all the worlds. (45) A Brahmana eats his own food, wears his own (clothing) and gives away
his own (property to others). Itis by his sufferance that the Ksatriyas and others eat their
food. (46) May you—who are well-versed in the Vedas and have in your abounding
compassion precisely explained to us, in the course of your dissertation on the Spirit, the
true nature of God as depicted above—may you ever be pleased with your own acts (of
delivering the afflicted). Who will make himself a butt of ridicule by presuming to
recompense your acts of benevolence? (47)

a आत्मयोगपतय आदिराजेन पूजिता: | शीलंतदीयं शंसन्त: खेऽभूवावन्मिषतां नृणाम् 1s |

arg gal महतां संस्थित्याध्यात्मशिक्षया | आप्तकाममिवात्मानं मेन आत्मन्यवस्थित: ।४९॥

कर्माणि च यथाकालं यथादेशं चथाबलम्। यथोचितं यथावित्तमकरोद्ब्रह्यसात्कृतम् |KO |

फलं ब्रह्मणि विन्यस्य निर्विषङ्म: समाहित: । कर्माध्यक्षं च मन्वान आत्मानं प्रकृते: परम् । ५१॥

गृहेषु वर्तमानोऽपि स साम्राज्यश्रियान्वित: | नासज्जतेन्दरियार्थेषु निरहंमतिरर्कवत् | ५२॥
Maitreya continued : Adored by king Prthu (the first constitutional monarch on the
earth), and praising his virtuous conduct, those masters of the science of Self-Realization,
