Dis. 15 ] BOOK THREE 201

HHOACACKERESHHKARARECCHCSAAERATCCK SAE HEKKEN ETN CE LET EHH NH HEHE Nee EMRE HHH
SARAOORCECRAAANECRESLAA TRACKER SMEAR AATEC ewEENE A LAH क्त शाजन्र क्र IMENT
त
मेत्रेय उवाच
११ = a
स प्रहस्य महाबाहो भगवान् ङब्दगोचर: | प्रत्याचष्टात्मभूर्देवान् प्रीणन् रुचिरया गिरा । ११॥

Maitreya went on: Lord Brahma (the self-born), 0 mighty-armed Vidura, to whom
the above prayer was addressed, laughed (at their rank ignorance in praying to him as
if he were the Supreme Deity), and replied in sweet words to the great delight of the

gods. (11) ह
ब्रह्मोवाच

मानसा A सुता qe: सनकादय: | चेरुर्विहायसा लोकांल्लोकेषु विगतस्पृहा: 1221
a एकदा भगवतो वैकुण्ठस्यामलात्मन: | ययुर्वैकुण्ठनिलयं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम् | 23 |
वसन्ति wa gem: wd वैकुण्ठमूर्तय: । येऽनिमित्तनिमित्तेन धर्मेणाराधयन् हरिम् । १४॥
यत्र चाद्य: पुमानास्ते भगवान् Beare: । सत्त्वं विष्टभ्य विरजं स्वानां नो मृडयन् वृष: । १५॥
यत्र नै:श्रेयसं नाम वनं कामदुघैर्दुमै: । सर्वर्तुश्रीभिर्विभ्राजत्कैवल्यमिव मूर्तिमत् । १६॥
वैमानिक्रा: सललनाश्चरितानि यत्र गायन्ति लोकज्ञपलक्षपणा'नि भर्तु: ।
अन्तर्जलेऽनुविकसन्मधुमाधवीनां गन्धेन खण्डितधियोऽप्यनिलं far: 1201
Brahma said : My mind-born sons, Sanaka and his three brothers, who are the eldest
of you all, went about the various worlds by air, free from attachment to them. (12) Once upon
a time they went to the realm, called Vaikuntha, of Lord Visnu (of irresistible might), whose
mind and body are purely divine (free from the taint of Maya) in substance~a realm which
is adored by (stands at the top of) all other realms. (13) All the people living there are
endowed with a form similar to that of Lord Vaikuntha (Visnu) Himself; and it is attained by
those alone who have worshipped Sri Hari through the disinterested performance of their
duty. (14) There the most ancient Person (Lord Narayana), who can be known only through
the Upanisads and who is righteousness personified, (eternally) dwells, having assumed a
form which is made of Sattva unmixed with Rajas (i.e., Sattva which is purely immaterial or
divine) and delighting us, His devotees. (15) In that realm there is an orchard called
Naihsreyasa, which is beatitude incarnate as it were, and which is resplendent with trees that
yield all that is desired and are laden with fruits and flowers in every season. (16) Seated in
aerial cars with their consorts, the Gandharvas (of that realm) sing the stories of their Master
(Lord Visnu), that are capable of wiping out the sins of the whole world. Even though their
mind is distracted by the fragrance of Madhavi flowers (spring-flowers) laden with honey and
blossoming in water, they (refuse to be led away by it and) censure* the breeze (carrying
the fragrance). (17)

पारावतान्यभृतसारसचक्रवाकदात्यूहहंसशुकतित्तिरिबर्हिणां य: ।
कोलाहलो विरमतेऽचिरमात्रमुच्चैर्भृङ्गाधिपे हरिकथामिव गायमाने ।१८॥
।
गन्थेऽविततुलसिकाभरप्पनतस्यायस्मिस्तप सुमनसोबहुप।नयन्ति।१९|
* Even though everything in that realm is divine in essence and the fragrance of the Madhavi flowers, which is akin to
the fragrance of the Lord's own person, only reminds them of the latter instead of diverting their mind towards anything foreign,

the Gandharvas are so deeply attached to the Lord's stories that they are reluctant to exchange the joy of singing them for
any other joy, even though it may be equally divine.

[564] B. M. 9—
