Dis. 50] BOOK TEN 323

PAPA PET RUNES Eee LE TEES ENTERS SESE EET SSE TES SERCO Sa Rt Ste ES AOR A A

सुधर्मां पारिजातं च महेन्द्र प्राहिणाद्धरे । यत्र arated wet मर्त्यधर्मैर्न युज्यते iu!
श्यामैककर्णान् वरुणो हयाञ्छुक्कान् मनोजवान्। अष्टौ निधिपति: कोञान्लोकपालो निजोदयान् । ५६1
we aq भगवता दत्तमाधिपत्यं स्वसिद्धये | सर्व प्रत्यर्पयामासुर्हगौ भूमिगते TT ।५७1
त्त्र चोगप्रभावेण नीत्वा सर्वजनं हरि: । प्रजापालेन रामेण कृष्ण: समनुमन्तित: |
निर्जगाम पुरद्वारात् पद्ममाली निरायुध: । ५८1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामन्कन्धं उत्तरार्धे दुर्गनिवेदानं नाम पञ्चादात्तमोऽध्याय: 140 |
Seeing him, Sri Krsna, who enjoyed the companionship of Sankarsana (Balarama),
thought (as follows): "Oh, a great calamity has surely overtaken the Yadus from both sides
(viz., Kalayavana and Jarasandha). This Yavana, who is followed by a huge army, has
certainly invested us today. (And) Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) will also come either
today or tomorrow or the day after {at the latest). (46-47) If Jarasandha (the foster-son of
Jara, the demoness) comes while We are both (engaged in) contending with this fellow, the
mighty Jarasandha will (either) make short work of our relations or take them away (as
captives) to his own capital. (48) Therefore, we shall this (very) dey constructa citadel which
will be difficult of access to men (lit., bipeds) and, having ensconced our relations there, shall
(return and) have the Yavana killed (by strategem)."* (49) Having deliberated thus, the Lord
caused a fortress to be built in the (western) sea (by ViSwakarma, the architect of the gods)
as well asa city (inside the fortress), extending over (an area of) twelve Yojanas (96 miles)
and containing all wonderful things—a city in which expert knowledge of architecture (a
science attributed to Twasta, the architect of the gods) as wellas (unique) masonic skill stood
revealed, and which was specially constructed with roads, streets and quadrangles (strictly)
conforming to the site (assigned to them in standard works on architecture). (50-51) It was
(duly) provided with gardens consisting of celestial trees and creepers as well as with
wonderful groves and was built (according to a definite plan) with attics and gateways of
crystal touching the (very) heavens with their domes of gold, barns of silver and brass
adorned with gold pitchers, houses of gold with tops of jewels and floors of emerald, temples
dedicated to the deities presiding over the foundation of houses and home-steads etc., and
wooden sheds on the roofs of houses. The city was crowded with men belonging to the four
orders of society and shone forth with palaces belonging tothe rulers of the Yadus (Ugrasena
and Vasudeva, Balarama and Sri Krsna). (52—54) The great Indra sent down (from heaven
as a present) for Sri Krsna (his famous assembly hall known by the name of) Sudharma as
wellas the Parijata tree (one of the five well-known species of celestial trees), stationed under
the shade of which a mortal does not remain tied down to the characteristics of mortals (viz.,
hunger and thirst, old age and death, grief and infatuation). (55) Varuna (the god of water)
sent down (milk-) white horses with one dark ear and swift as thought; Kubera (the lord of
treasures), the eight treasures; and the guardians of (other) spheres, the riches peculiar to

* The Lord did not kill the Yavana Himself obviously because he had been got asa boon from Lord Siva, who had further
ordained that ihe boy would prove a terror to the Yadus. (Vide Visnu-Purana V.xxiil. 1—4)
