Dis. 7

ray Bor se
न्

isena,
of the
i sinful
ibe the
as, are

id of the
ties and
red and
2 course
from Its
hich the
if eternal
‘ding the
‘ain, has
bestows
ormed in
solved as
orn Spirit

kol
५१॥
५२॥
५३॥

niverse by
i, although
is pleased
|) Proceed

iti Hari, the

‘o describe
described

gs

Dis. 8 ] . >. BOOK-TWO

SOE ETERNEeCEREAAEEERSENE TSE TERRA ATH

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:
Discourse VIII
King Pariksit asks various questions of the sage Suka

राजोवाच
ब्रह्मणा चोदितो ब्रह्मन् गुणाख्यानेऽगुणस्य च । यस्मे ae यथा प्राहं नारदो देवदर्शन: |
एतद्वेदितुमिच्छप्पितत्वंवदावदा`^॰बर।हारद्भुतवार्यंस्प` it SM लोकसुमङ्गला: |
कथयस्व महाभाग यथह्वमखिलप्त्यमि।वृज्योनिवेठ्यनि:सङ्गंपनस्त्यक्ष्येफ्लेबरम्।
ऽनृण्बत:श्रद्धध्रा‘निल्_चॆगृणतश्चस्वचष्टिंतम` । कालेन नातिदीर्घेण भगवान् faa हृदि |
gfe: कर्णरन्ध्रेण ari भावसरोरुहम् | धुनोति शमलं कृष्ण: सलिलस्य यथा WA |
धोतात्माघुरूष;कृष्णपादमूकंनमुञ्चति।पुक्तसर्वंपरिक्केश: पान्थ: स्वहारणं यथा
The king said : Narada is wont to reveal the form of the Lord (to those who i
His sight), O holy sage. Therefore, when Brahma (the Creator) urged him to d
length) the virtues of the Lord who transcends the three Gunas (modes of Praki
particular individuals did he discourse about those virtues and in what manner
curious to know this in reality (from you), who are foremostamong the knowers of
for the stories of Sri Hari, who possesses marvellous powers, are a source of |
blessing to the world. (2) Tell me, highly blessed sage, how am | to fix my mind
from all attachment, on Sri Krsna, the Soul of the universe, before casting off this
The Lord enters before long the heart of the man who daily listens with revere
stories and also narrates His doings. (4) Reaching the lotus of His devotees, he
the cavity of their ears, Sri Krsna rids it of all impurities even as autumn turns tt
rivers etc.) clear. (5) He whose heart is thus purified is rid of all afflictions (of mt
and would never abandon the soles of His feet, just as a traveller (who has retu
after a long and tedious journey would not leave his own roof. (6)

यदधातुमतो ब्रह्मन् देहारम्भोऽस्य धातुभि:।यदृच्छयाहेतुनावाभबन्तोजानतेयथा

आसीद्यदुढ्रात्पद्मंलोकसंस्थानलक्षणम्।याबानयंवैपुंरुघइयत्ताक्यवॆ: पृथक्
तावानसाविति प्रोक्त: संस्थावयववानिव | ८ |

अज:सृजतिभूतानिभ्रूप्तात्मायदनुप्रहात्।ददृज्ञे a तद्रूपे नाभिपद्मसमुद्धव:

सचांघियत्रपुंरुषोविश्वस्थित्युद्घवाप्यय:।मुक्ता&ऽत्मपत्यांमायॆज्ञ:ज्ञेतेसर्वगुहरिंप्त्य:

The soul, O divine sage, has no connection with the elements (matter); yetit:
which is made up of these very elements. You know in reality whether this hi
matter of course or due to some Causes (Karma etc.). (7) The Lord, from who
(navel) sprang up the lotus representing the fourteen worlds, has been spoken o
endowed with the same limbs and the same number of limbs as an ordinary h
the measurements alone being His own. Hence He is just like acommon man. |
then, does He differ from man ?) (8) Itis by His grace that Brahma, who represer
creates them: anditis by His grace alone, that he was able to behold His divine
born of the lotus sprung from His navel. (9)Where does that Supreme Person, W
of Maya and the Indweller of all hearts, and from whom proceed the creation,
and destruction of the universe, rest after throwing off (the veil of) His Maya? |
heard from yourselfthat the various worlds together with their guardian deities \
