446 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

LS AROS कक क दौ णि क क द् कक RAR ARORA RERARE RESALE OE SEAS SASASSAS SALE ARAEEER AERA RE ee पे
——ooe a 00 _ _ EEE Eee eee

awakened (in their turn) by the notes uttered by pairs of land birds perched on golden
creepers intertwined with the boughs of densely-growing trees of every description; and
Purvacitti sauntered about that garden. (4) The steps she took in the course of her
exceedingly graceful stroll exhibited the charm of her gait and at her every pace the beautiful
ornaments she wore about her feet made a jingling sound, hearing which the prince slightly
opened both his eyes—resemblinga pair of lotus buds—till now closed inthe practice of deep
meditation, and espied her. (5) Like a female honey-bee the celestial damsel was enjoying
the (sweet) odour of flowers not very far (from him), and carving a passage for Love (using
flowers for his weapons) intothe minds of men by (the witchery of) her gait, sport, bashful
and modest-glances, musical voice and (graceful) limbs—all ravishing the mind and eyes of
(both) gods and men. And her full breasts, head of hair and girdle were thrown into a state
of charming agitation as she walked with quick paces, when assailed by swarms of honey-
bees maddened by the sweet fragrance of (her breath in the form of) words—accompanied
with a smile—that escaped from her mouth and which were (sweet) as nectar and
(inebriating as) wine. The prince succumbed to the dominating influence of the most powerful
god of love—who had found an open door to his heart the moment the prince saw her—and
addressed her like a dunce in the following words:— (6)

amt wt faattife a fk afret ve arent enfty smracedaaran:
विज्ये बिभर्षि धनुषी सुहृदात्मनोऽर्थे किं वा मृगान्मृगयसे विपिने प्रमत्तान्। ७ ।

बाणाविमौ भगवत: शतपत्रपत्रौ शान्तावपुङ्खुरुचिरावतितिग्मदन्तौ।
कस्मै युयुंक्षसि ay विचरन्न fas: क्षेमाय नो जडधियां wa विक्रमोऽस्तु। ८ ।

शिष्या इमे भगवत: परित: पठन्ति गायन्ति am सरहस्यमजस्रमीशम्।
युष्मच्छिखाविलुलिता: सुमनोऽभिवृष्टी: Fa भजन्त्यृषिगणा ga वेदशाखा:। ९ ।

at WW चरणपञ्जरतित्तिरीणां व्रह्मन्नरूपमुखरां शृणवाम तुभ्यम्।
लब्धा कदम्बरुचिरङ्कविटङ्कबिम्बे यस्यामलातपरिधि: क्व च वल्कलं ते।१०]।

fa सम्भृतं रुचिरयोरद्विज शृङ्गयोस्ते wea कृशो वहसि यत्र दृशि: श्रिता मे।
पङ्कोऽरुण: सुरभिरात्मविषाण ईंदृग् येनाश्रमं सुभग मे सुरभीकरोषि।११।

wie प्रदर्शय सुहृत्तम Wah मे यत्रत्य इत्थमुरसावयवावपूर्वौ।
अस्मद्विधस्य मनउन्नयनौ fault बह्वद्भुतं सरसराससुधादि वक्ते। १२॥

का वाऽऽत्मवृत्तिरदनाद्धविरङ्ग ate विष्णो: कलास्यनिमिषोन्मकरौ च कर्णौ।
उद्विग्नमीनयुगलं द्विजपङ्क्तिशोचिरासन्नभृङ्गनिकरे सर sa ते।१३॥

योऽसौ wat करसरोजहत: पतङ्गो दिक्षु भ्रमन् भ्रमत एजयतेऽक्षिणी मे।
मुक्तं न ते स्मरसि वक्रजटावस्थं कष्ठोऽनिलो हरति लम्पट एष नीवीम्। ex!
Ud तपोऽर्हसि मया ve faa we किं वा प्रसीदति a a भवभावनो Feu

न cat त्यजामि दयितं द्विजदेवदत्तं यस्मिन्मनो दृगपि नो न वियाति लग्नम्।
मां चारुशृङ्ग्यर्हसि नेतुमनुव्रतं a चित्तं aa: प्रतिसरन्तु शिवा: सचिव्य: । १६॥
“Who are you and what do you intend to do on this hill, 0 great sage ? Are you the
inscrutable Maya (deluding potency) of the all-powerful Supreme Deity? (Pointing to her

eyebrows) O friend! do you wield that pair of stringless bows for your own protection or are
you in search of (some) unwary game (creatures like me, who have no control over their
