Dis. 24 ] BOOK EIGHT “ - 835

SSRSSS ESM ES AAG ER RENEE REREL AR EHONTN THEN RAEI HAAR EeREMANEAAAEHERIE ANTM Eee

succeeding one being larger than the previous one); but, finding it equal in size toeach (such)
lake, (eventually) transferred it to the ocean. (23) While being led (into the ocean), the fish
spoke to him as follows: "Mighty alligators and other (aquatic) creatures in this ocean may
eat me, O valiant monarch! You should not (therefore) leave me here."(24)
एवं विमोहितस्तेन वदता वल्गुभारतीम्। तमाह को भवानस्मान् मत्स्यरूपेण मोहयन् । २५॥
नैवंवीर्यो जलचरो दृष्टोऽस्माभि: श्रुतोऽपि च । यो भवान् योजनशतमह्नाभिव्यानशो सर: । २६॥
नूनं त्वं भगवान् साक्षाद्धरिर्नारायणोऽव्यय: | अनुग्रहाय भूतानां धत्से रूपं जलौकसाम् 1291
नमस्ते पुरुषश्रेष्ठ स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्ययेश्वर | भक्तानां न: प्रपन्नानां मुख्यो ह्यात्मगतिर्विभो 1221
सर्वे लीलावतारास्ते भूतानां भूतिहेतव: । ज्ञातुमिच्छाम्यदो रूपं यदर्थं भवता धृतम् । २९॥
न afer पदोषपसर्पणं मृषा भवेत् सर्वसुहत्म्रियात्मन: |
यथेतरेषांपृथगात्मनांसत्तामदॊदृशॊयद्वपुंरद्भुतंहिन:।३॰।

Thus deluded by the fish, that spoke (such) charming words, the king said (to it): "Who
are You, bewitching us (as You do) in the form of a (gigantic) whale (25) No aquatic creature
possessed of such (wonderful) power as You has (ever) been seenor (even) heardof by us—
You, who have grown in a day large enough to cover the whole lake, eight hundred miles in
extent.(26) You are undoubtedly the immortal Lord Narayana Himself, the Destroyer of sins,
who have assumed the form of aquatics (whales) in order to shower Your grace on (all)
created beings. (27) Hail to You, O supreme Person, controlling the (cosmic) functions of
creation, maintenance and dissolution! You are the true Self as well as the goal of us, Your
devotees, that have sought You (for protection). (28) (Although, generally speaking,) all Your
sportful descents are conducive to the welfare of (all) living beings, | wish to know (in
particular) the purpose for which this form (of a whale) has been assumed by You. (29) Itis
not futile to take shelter under Your feet, O lotus-eyed Lord, as it is to approach the feet of
those who are identified with the body, You being the disinterested friend, nay, the beloved
Self ofall, (as is evident from the fact that) You have revealed Your wonderful form to us, Your

devotees. (30)
श्रीगुक उवाच
इति get fe जगत्पति: सत्यव्रतं मत्स्यवपुर्युगक्षये ।
विहर्तुकाम: प्रलयार्णवेऽब्रवीच्चिकीर्षुरेकान्तजनप्रिय: प्रियम् । ३१॥
Sti Suka continued : To king Satyavrata, who had spoken thus, the Lord of the
universe—who desired to sport in the ocean for the dissolution of the universe at the end of `
the Kalpa (which was imminent) and had accordingly assumed the form of a fish, (nay,) who.

sought to do a good turn to the king, fond to He is of those exclusively devoted to Him—said
(as follows). (31)

आरुह्य Feit wea विचरिष्यस्यविक्लव: । एकार्णव्रे निरालोके ऋषीणामेव वर्चसा 1341
दोधूयमानां at ad समीरेण बलीयसा | उपस्थितस्य मे ys निबश्नीहि महाहिना । ३६॥
अहं त्वामृषिभि: साकं सहनावमुदन्वति | विकर्षन् विचरिष्यामि यावद् व्राह्मी Fran प्रभो 1319 |
मदीयंपहिपान'चपरंब्रह्येतिरैग्ब्दितम्।वत्स्वस्यनुगृहॊत` नं मे संप्रश्नैर्विवृतं हृदि । ३८॥
