Dis. 84 ] BOOK TEN 477

See Oe eee ON EERE eee eee Eee 99 TKN EL EAE KHER १8 ##6:## # आ

अस्मास्वप्रतिकल्पेयं यत् कृताज्ञेषु सत्तमै: । मैत्र्यर्पिताफला वापि न निवर्तेत कर्हिचित् । ६२।
प्रागकल्पाच्च Has भ्रातर्वो नाचराम «fei अधुना श्रीमदान्धाक्षा न पद्याम: पुर: सत: 1631
मा राज्यश्रीरभूत् Ga: श्रेयस्कामस्य मानद। स्वजनानुत बन्धून् वा न पद्यति ययान्धदृक् । ६४।

Vasudeva said : Brother (Nanda), God has forged for men a bond which is known by
the name of affection. | think the greatest of warriors and Yogis find it difficult to undo it. (61)
Highly virtuous as you are, the friendship you have shown to us, ungrateful souls, is
unparalleled and cannot be repaid; and yet (we know) it will never cease (it will continue for
ever). (62) O btother, formerly we could not do any good turn to you precisely because we
were helpless, and now we are blinded by intoxication of wealth and power and do not look
at you even though you stand before us. (63) O virtuous brother, let not royal fortune fall to
the lot of one who seeks blessedness. Blinded by it, man fails to recognize even his own
kinsmen and relations. (64)

श्रीगुक उवाच
एवं सौहदत्रैथिल्यचित्त आनकदुन्दुभि: । रुदोद तत्कृतां मैत्रीं स्मरन्नश्रुविलोचन: । ६५॥
नन्दस्तु सख्यु: प्रियकृत् प्रेम्णा गोविन्दरामयो: | अद्य श्व इति मासांस्त्रीन् यदुभिर्मानितोऽवसत् । ६६1
aa: कामै: पूर्यमाण: wast: सहबान्धव: । परार्घ्यभरणक्षौमनानानर्घ्यपरिच्छदै: । ६७॥
वसुदेवोग्रसेनाभ्यां कृष्णोद्धवबलादिभि: । दत्तमादाय पारिर्हं यापितो यदुभिर्ययौ 1६८1
नन्दो गोपाश्च ray गोविन्दचरणाम्बुजे। मन: fag पुनर्हर्तुमनीञा मथुरां ययु: 1६९1

Sri Suka continued : (Pariksit,) Vasudeva's heart melted with love as he said all this.
Tears rushed to his eyes, as he remembered the love and friendship which Nanda bore to
him and he began to weep. (65) Anxious to please his friend and out of affection for Sri Krsna
and Balarama, Nanda put off his departure from day to day and stayed (there) for three
months receiving the best attentions of the Yadus.(66) They gratified him and his brother
Gopas and other residents of Vraja (who had accompanied him) with enjoyments of various
kinds as well as with valuable ornaments, silk garments and other invaluable presents. (67)
Vasudeva, Ugrasena, Sri Krsna, Balarama, Uddhava and others (severally) presented him
with gifts. Taking all these and permitted by the Yadus, Nanda left (for his home). (68)
(Pariksit,) Nanda as well as the other Gopas and Gopis had transferred their heart to the
lotus-feet of Sri Krsna; and they were unable to withdraw it from them. (So) they departed
for Mathura (leaving their heart behind). (69)

बन्धुषु प्रतियातेषु वृष्णय: कृष्णदेवता: । वीक्ष्य प्रावृषमासन्नां ययुर्द्दरवतीं पुन: Ivo!

जनेभ्य: कथयाञ्चक्रुर्यदुदेवमहोत्सवम् । यदासीत्तीर्थयात्रायां सुहृत्सन्दर्शनादिकम् ।७१।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे seo तीर्थयात्रानुवर्णनं नाम चतुरशीतितमोऽध्याय: ।८४।

(Pariksit,) when all the friends had (thus) returned (to their respective places), the Yadus,
wholooked on SriKrsnaas their deity, and whonowsaw the monsoon approaching, returned
to Dwaraka. (70) (Reaching there) they gave to the people an account of the grand festival
(in the form of a sacrificial performance) celebrated by Vasudeva, the adored of the gods,
