676 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

त्र आ tor toe a etree er ee EE SEAMEN HSE क OATH ee री को TEM EH HT री क ऊडीजरित व वी

(Hiranyakasipu), the scourge of the world, has been eaten away by his own sin as a serpent
by ants." (2-3) Perceiving their mighty undertaking and being struck by the gods, the terror-
stricken Asura generals, who were all anxious to save their life, hastily fled in every direction,
paying no heed to their wife and children, friends and relations, houses, animals and other
household goods. (4-5) Desirous of victory, the gods looted the king's residence; while Indra
(the ruler of the gods) even seized the queen, my mother. (6) Narada (the celestial sage),
who came there by chance, saw her being taken on the road, trembling with fear and crying
like a female osprey. (7) He peremptorily said, "You should not take this innocent lady, O lord
of divinities ! Leave, leave, O blessed one, the good woman, who is another's wedded
wife."(8)
इन्द्र उवाच
आस्तेऽस्या जठरे वीर्यमविषह्यं सुरद्विष: | आस्यतां यावत्प्रसवं मोक्ष्येर्थपदवीं Ta: । ९ ।

Indra replied ; There is in her womb (in the form of an embryo) the formidable seed of
Hiranyakasipu (the enemy of the gods). Let her (therefore) stay (in my captivity) till (the time
of) delivery. | shall let her go when | have achieved my object (by killing the new-born
babe).(9)

ARG sara
ara निष्किल्बिष: साक्षाऽन्महाभागवतो महान्। Sal न प्राप्स्यते संस्थामनन्तानुचरो बली । १०॥
इत्युक्तस्तां विहायेन्द्रो देवर्षेर्मानयन्वच: | अनन्तप्रियभक्त्यैनां परिक्रम्य दिवं ययो ।११।

Narada said : He (the child in her womb) is not only (absolutely) sinless but a great
devotee of the Lord and eminent by his own qualities. This mighty servant of Lord Visnu will
not meet his death at your hands. (10) Thus addressed (by Narada) and accepting the advice
of the celestial sage, Indra left her (my mother) and going round her (as a mark of respect)
out of devotion to me (the beloved of the eternal Lord), returned to heaven. (11)

ततो नो मातरमृषि: समानीय निजाश्रमम्। आश्वास्येहोष्यतां वत्से यावत् ते भर्तुरागम: 1821
adware देवर्षेरन्ति साप्यकुतोभया | यावद् दॆत्यपतिर्घोरात् तपसो न ada 1231
afi पर्यचरत् तत्र भक्त्या परमया सती । अन्तर्वत्नी स्वगर्भस्य क्षेमायेच्छाप्रसूतये । १४॥
Then the sage took our mother with due honour to his own hermitage and, comforting her,
said, "Stay here, my daughter, till the return of your husband.” (12) She too signified her
assent in the words "So be it!" and lived near the celestial sage, free from all fear, so long
as my father (the ruler of the Daityas) did not cease from his terrible austerities. (13) For the
well-being of her embryo (myself) and in order to deliver it at the desired moment (after the
return of her husband) the virtuous and pregnant lady waited upon the sage in that hermitage
with supreme devotion. (14)
caft: कारुणिकस्तस्या: प्रादादुभयमीश्वर: | धर्मस्य तत्त्वं ज्ञानं च मामप्युद्दिश्य निर्मलम् eu
तत्तु कालस्य दीर्घत्वात् स्रीत्वान्मातुस्तिरोदधे | ऋषिणानुगृहीतं. मां नाधुनाप्यजहात् स्मृति: । १६।
भवतामपि भूयान्मे यदि श्रद्दधते aa: | वैशारदी धी: श्रद्धात: स्रीबालानां च मे यथा । १७।
जन्माद्या: षडिमे भावा दृष्टा देहस्य नात्मन: । फलानामिब वृक्षस्य कालेनेश्वरमूर्तिना ॥१८॥
आत्मा नित्योऽव्यय: शुद्ध UH: Sag आश्रय: | अविक्रिय: स्वदृग् हेतुरव्यापकोऽसङ्ग्यनावृत: ।१९।
mui यथा ग्रावसु हेमकार: क्षेत्रेषु योगैस्तदभिज्ञं आप्नुयात् ।
aay aay तथाऽऽत्मयोगैरध्यात्मविद् व्रह्मगतिं BY 1221
