618 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

SRE HE DEMO EERE न एक न OT NNN क प ए ता २२ RET EEE HE OE HEE CORE OE ना मा गक माल् २०० ETE ५ ४४ ७ ४ EERE

gross elements, the ten Indriyas and the mind) and the (seven) causal principles (viz.. the
Mahat-tattva, Anankara and the five objects of sense) indeed, Prakrti (being the material
cause) undergoes the state of being created etc., through Sattva and the other (two) Gunas
(or modes of Prakrti) at the time of creation etc., of this (visible) universe; whereas the
immutable Purusa (being the efficient cause) looks on (as a mere witness). (17) Energized
by a glance from the Purusa and united with one another, fundamental principles like Mahat-
tattva (which enter into the constitution of the universe), undergoing transformation, bring
forth the cosmic egg with the help of Prakrti (their source). (18)

सप्तैव ama इति तत्रार्था: पञ्च खादय: | ज्ञानमात्मोभयाधारस्ततो देहेन्द्यासव: 1281
षडित्यत्रापि ya पञ्च षष्ठ: पर: पुमान्।तैर्युक्त आत्मसम्भूतै: gps समुपाविदात् iol
चत्वार्येवेति तत्रापि aa आपोऽन्नमात्मन: । जातानि afte जातं जन्मावयविन: we 1221
संख्याने owner yan च । पञ्च पञ्चैकमनसा आत्मा सप्तदश: BA: 1221
TA, षोडशसंख्याने आत्मैव wa उच्यते। भूतेन्द्रयाणि पञ्चैव मन आत्मा त्रयोदहा 1231
एकादशत्व आत्मासौ महाभूतेन्द्रयाणि giant प्रकृतयश्चैव yeas नवेत्यथ । २४॥
इति नानाप्रसंख्यारनं तत्त्वानामृषिभि: कृतम्। ad न्याय्यं युक्तिमत्त्वाद् विदुषां किम्चोभनम् । २५॥

According to the view that the fundamental principles are (only) seven (vide verse 2
above), the five elements beginning with ether, (the principle of) consciousness (viz., the
subject or Jiva) and the (universal) Spirit, the Ground of both (the subject and the object),
these are the (seven) categories (Prakrti etc., the causal principles, being included in their
evolutes); from the above-named (seven Categories) spring up the body, the Indriyas (the
five senses of perception and the five organs of action) as well as the vital airs (comprising
the evolutes, all of which are likewise included in their causes). (19) (Similarly) even
according to the view (also referred to in verse 2 above) that the fundamental principles are
six (only), they are the five elements, the sixth being the Supreme Person. Having evolved
this (objective) universe in conjunction with the former (viz., the elements), sprung from
Himself, He enters it (as its Inner Controller) (According to this view all objective existences
should be taken as covered by the five elements and the individual soul by the Universal
Spirit.) (20) Even according to the view (also mentioned in verse 2 above) that the categories
are four only, they are fire, water and earth (the source of and as such no other than food),
evolved from the Spirit (the fourth principle). (Prakrti and the other causal principles should
be recognized here as includedin thetr three evolutes enumerated in this verse and the other
two elements, viz., ether and the air too likewise included in them or rejected as superfluous.)
By means of the aforesaid (four) categories indeed has this evolution of the universe (which
is made up of so many parts) taken place. (21) According to the view (referred to in verse
3 above) which enumerates seventeen principles, they are the five elements, the five
Tanmatras (objects of senses) and the five senses of perception alongwith the one mind, and
the Atma (or the Spirit, which includes the individua! soul as well as the Universal Spirit) being
recognizedas the seventeenth. (22) Likewise, according to the view (also mentionedin verse
3) which enumerates sixteen categories, the Atma itself (in its thinking aspect) is spoken of
as the mind. (Again, according to the view. finding mention in verse 3 above, which
recognizes only thirteen categories) the five elements (including the five Tanmatras) and the
same number of senses (that reveal them), the mindand the twofold Spirit (viz., the individual
soul and the Universal Spirit) constitute the thirteen principles. (23) According to the view
(referred to in verse 2) restricting the number of categories to eleven (only), they comprise
the aforesaid Atma (which includes the individual soul as well as the mind). the (five) gross
elements and the (five) senses (of perception). (Similarly according to the view. also
