३०4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 47

SRS SRO ee HENS SEE EEN eee eee et Hees cee ets othe

notice or challenging him to an open combat according to the established canons of warfare)
and, domineered over by His Consort (Sita), deformed a woman (Siirpanakha),who had
approached Him with lust (in her heart). (Nay,) having accepted (as the divine Dwarf) Bali's
worship (in the form ofa gift of land measuring three strides) He bound him (even) as a crow
would (in conjunction with other crows) surround (and plague) its feeder after eating the food
offered by the latter. Therefore, enough of friendship with those possessed of a dark hue.
(Yet) the treasure in the form of His story is difficult to forgo. (17) With (all) their natural
propensities (in the form of likes and dislikes etc.), existing as pairs of opposites uprooted
by tasting but once even a small bit of His supremely delightful stories, which fall as nectar
on their ears, and (thus) completely ruined (in the eyes of the world), and leaving all of a
sudden their home and family in a wretched condition, many men here lead a fife of
mendicants, deprived of (all) enjoyment, like so many birds. (18) Believing as true the (false)
professions (of love) on the part of that Cheat, (even) as she-deer, the foolish companions
ofa black antelope, would put faith in the (deceptive) music of ahunter and suffer the torment
of being hit with a shaft, we ignorant sweethearts of Sri Krsna have repeatedly suffered this
fate, having been subjected to smarting pangs of love occasioned by the (loving) touch of
His nails. (Therefore,) O messenger, let any other topic be discussed (and talk no more of
Sri Krsna, whose very mention awakens memories that accentuate our agony of separation
from Him). (19) O friend of our beloved Lord ! sent (back) by our Darling (though stung with
our pungent words), have you come (fo us) again ? (Ifso,) ask what you would (of us); (for)
you are worthy of honour to me, O dear one ! How will you take us—who are here—to His
side, whose companionship is difficult to forgo (once it is had) ? (For) His (divine) Spouse,
Sri(the goddess of beauty and prosperity), O gentle one, ever remains with Him on His very
bosom (in the form a golden streak). (20) Ah, is my Darling lit., son of one’s father-in-law*
now at Mathura (has returned from the house of His preceptor after completing His studies
there)? Does He remember, O gentle one, his paternal house (the house of His godfather,
Nanda) as well as His relations and (other) cowherds? Does He ever make any references
to us His maid-servants ? Oh, when will He (return to Vraja and) place His arm, more
fragrant (even) than aloe-wood, on our head (by way of consolation)? (21)
HS उवाच
aig feed कृष्णदर्शनलालसा: । सान्त्वयन् freeeiniidifierama 1221

SriSukaresumed: On hearing this (unprecedented) effusion of love, Uddhava forthwith
spoke as follows to the cowherd women—who had been pining for a sight of Sri Krsna—
comforting them with messages (of love) from their beloved Lord. (22)

SEF उवाच

ae यूयं स्म पूर्णार्था भवत्यो लोकपूजिता: । वासुदेवे भगवति यासामित्यर्पितं मन: 1231
दानव्रततपोहोमजपस्वाध्यायसंयमै: | श्रेवोभिर्विविधैश्चान्यै: कृष्णे भक्तिर्हि साध्यते । २४॥
भगवत्युत्तमह्लोके भवतीभिरनुत्तमा | भक्ति: प्रवर्तिता दिष्ट्या मुनीनामपि दुर्लभा 124)
दिष्ट्या पुत्रान् पतीन् देहान् स्वजनान् भवनानि च । हित्वावृणीत यूयं यत् कृष्णाख्यं पुरुषं परम् । २६1
सर्वात्मभावोऽधिकृतो भवतीनामधोक्षजे | विरहेण महाभागा महान् मेऽनुग्रह: FA: 1201
श्रूयतां प्रियसन्देशो भवतीनां सुखावह:। यमादायागतो wear अहं a रहस्कर: ।२८॥

* Itis forbidden in our Sastras to utter one's own name or that of one's preceptor and other elders {including one’s parents

and grandparents, husband and his parents and so on), that of an abject miser or of one's eldest son or wedded wife even while
dying: —sTerry ER नामात्तिकृपणस्य च। प्राणान्तेऽपि न वक्नव्यं ज्यषठपत्रकलत्रवो:॥ (Karmalocana)

