Dis. 87 ] BOOK TEN 495

EAA TES ESTEE SE TERE TORT T ET LERNER CENTER NTN E RENEE RTE TELECON ConenneneCeiAt

(of the Jiva), as whose evolute it has come into being and which is inseparable from it as its
material cause andis equally present in all, nay, which is (practically) unknown to those who
claim to knowit, since whatever comes to be known is known imperfectly only. (30) The birth
(coming into being at a particular point of time) of Prakrti (primordial Matter) or of Purusa
(Spirit) does not stand to reason inasmuch as both of them are (declared in the scriptures
as) birthless or without beginning. Living beings (on the other hand) come into existence
(only) when the two (viz., Prakrti and Purusa, matter and spirit) come to be united (mistaken
for one another), (just) as bubbles appear on (the surface of) water through the interaction
of air and water. (Since the birth of the Jivas in this way is only apparent and not real,) that
is why they getenerged in You { the final Cause ) with (all) their several names and attributes
(in the state of Liberation) even as rivers disappear into the sea or (during dreamless sleep)
just as all (kinds of) nectars of flowers get dissolved into (what is ultimately known by the
name of) honey. (31)

WA तव मायया भ्रमममीष्नवगत्य भृशं त्वयि सुधियोऽभवे दधति भावमनुप्रभवम् ।
कथमनुवर्ततां भवभयं wa aq भ्रुकुटि: gaia मुहुस्रिणेमिरभवच्छरणेषु भयम् 1321
विजितहषीकवायुभिरदान्तमनस्तुरगं य ge यतन्ति यन्तुमतिलोलमुपायखिद: |
व्यसनशातान्विता: समवहाय गुरोश्चरणं वणिज sat सन्त्यकृतकर्णधरा जलधौ ।३३॥

Perceiving the misapprehension (in the shape of self-identification with the body etc.),
implanted by Maya (Your deluding potency), in these human beings, men of sound judgment
develop intense devotion—that grows every moment to You, who are capable of putting a
Stop to their transmigration. How can the fear of birth (even) haunt those that worship You,
since Your frown in the shape of (the wheel of) Time (as represented by a twelvemonth) with
its threefold rim (as consisting of the three parts of the year, viz., winter, summerand the rainy
season) inspires terror (again and again) into (the mind of) those (alone) who do not resort
to You as their asylum. (32) They who endeavour to break the most restless steed of their
mind—unsubdued (even) by those who have controlled their senses and breath (too)—
neglecting the feet of their preceptor, and taking (great) pains over other devices (for mind-
control), remain beset with a hundred and one calamities in this world like merchants that
have not secured a pilot (for their vessel) in the sea, O birthless Lord ! (33)

स्वजनसुतात्मदारधनधामधरासुरथैस्त्वयि सति किं qo श्रयत आत्मनि सर्वरसे ।
sft सदजानतां मिथुनतो wa चरतां सुखयति को न्विह स्वविहते स्वनिरस्तभगे । ३४॥
भुवि पुरुषुण्यतीर्थसदनान्यृषयो विमदास्त sq भवत्पदाम्बुजहरदोऽघभिदङ्ध्रिजला: ।
दधति सकृन्मनस्त्वयि य आत्मनि नित्यसुखे न पुनरुपासते पुरुषसारहरावसथान् । ३५॥

What is to be gained by men though kinsfolk, progeny, (their own) body, wife, wealth,
houses, land, (nay,) their (very) life and chariots etc., while You, the (real) Self of the man
seeking shelter in You, the embodiment of all blessings, are there (by his side)? Indeed what
object in this inherently peristiable world, intrinsically shorn of all substance, can (really)
gratify those who are unaware of this (aforementioned) truth (viz., Your being the sole
embodiment of real happiness) and are striving for the (false) pleasure of married life?(34)
Sages who are destitute of (all) pride and treasure Your-lotus feet in their heart and the water
washing whose feet is (accordingly) capable of destroying the (entire) sin (of those who sip
itor sprinkle it on their head and eyes etc.) yet resort to the numerous holy lakes and rivers
and places of pilgrimage on ( the surface of) the earth (since it is there that they secure the
company of exalted souls). For, they who set their mind (but) once on You, their (very) Self,
the embodiment of everlasting bliss, no longer remain attached to their household, which
drains the very best in men (in the shape of their judgment, fortitude, forbearance, peace of
