96 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

doer trent ite nTene nario tent it ER ee EEO he EES RENE TREE ET OU eH OMe Te ee

adore the god of fire. Similarly, a seeker of wealth should worship the class of gods known
as the Vasus; while the poweriui man who aspires for more power should worship another
class of gods called the Rudras (part manifestations of Lord Siva). (3) A seeker of food and
foodstuffs should worship Aditi (the mother of the gods); while he who seeks (an abode in)
heaven should adore the sons of Aditi (the twelve Adityas). A seeker of sovereignty should
worship the Viswedevas (a particular class of gods born of Vigwa); while a ruler who desires
to secure the allegiance of his subjects should worship the Sadhyas (another class of
gods).(4) A seeker of long life should worship the twin gods, the Aswins (the physicians of
the gods) and he who desires Stoutness should worship the goddess Earth. Similarly he who
seeks stability of position or worldly prestige should adore the two mothers of the world, the
goddess Earth and Dyauh (the goddess presiding over the heavens). (5) A seeker of
personal charm should worship the Gandharvas; while he who desires to have a (lovely)
wife should adore the celestial nymph Urvasi. Even so he who seeks lordship over all should
worship Brahma. (6) A seeker of renown should worship Lord Visnu (the lord of sacrifices
or the deity presiding over sacrifices), while a seeker of treasures should adore Varuna (the
god presiding over the waters). Even so he who seeks to acquire learning should worship
Lord Siva; while a seeker of conjugal happiness should adore Goddess Uma, so devoted to
Her lord. (7) He who aspires to lead a pious life should worship Lord Visnu of excellent
renown: while he who desires to propagate his race should adore the Pitrs (the manes). He
who seeks protection against odds should worship the Yaksas (a class of demigods); while
a seeker of bodily vigour should adore the class of gods known as the Maruts (the wind-
gods). (8) He who seeks to acquire a kingdom should worship the gods that rule over the
world for a whole Manvantara (the age or period of a Manu); while he who seeks to employ
spells for some malevolent purpose should adore Nirrti (the goddess of death or the demon
presiding over the south-west). Even so the seeker of sense-gratification should worship
Soma (the moon-god); while he who longs for the cessation of all desires should adore the
Lord who transcends Prakrti or Matter. (9) Awise man, however—whether he has no desire
atall or is actuated by all sorts of desires (all those mentioned in the above verses and others
too) or seeks liberation (final beatitude—should worship the Supreme Person with intense
devotion. (10) The attainment of the highest good even for those who worship Indra and the
other gods lies in developing unswerving devotion to the Lord through the fellowship of His
devotees. (11) As a result of the discourses on Sri Hari (that are held in the company of
devotees) dawns that spiritual enlightenment which sets at rest the waves in the form of
passions; nay, the heart gets purated and is filled with joy and one develops an aversion for
the pleasures of sense and a love for devotion, which is an esteemed road to final beatitude.
Having once tasted the joy of listening to such discourseson SriHari, who would cease taking
delight in them ? (12)

इत्यभिव्याहतं राजा fara भरतर्षभ: | किमन्यत्पृष्टवान् भूयो वैयासकिमृषिं कविम् । १३।
एतच्छुश्रूषतां fag ga नोऽर्हसि भाषितुम् । कथा हरिकथोदर्का: सतां स्यु: सदसि ध्रुवम् । १४॥
स & भागवतो राजा पाण्डवेयो महारथ: | बालक्रीडनकै: क्रीडन् कृष्णक्रीडां य आददे । १५॥
वैयासकिश्च भगवान् वासुदेवपरायण: । उरुगायगुणोदारा: सतां fe समागमे । १६।
आयुर्हृरति वै पुंसामुद्यन्नस्तं च चन्नसौ । तस्यर्ते चत्क्षणो नीत उत्तमश्लोकवार्तया । १७
ava: किं न जीवन्ति भस्त्रा: किं न श्वसन्त्युत । न खादन्ति न मेहन्ति किं ग्रामपशवोऽपरे । १८।
श्वविड्वराहोष्ट्वरे: संस्तुत: पुरुष: पशु: । न चत्कर्णपथोपेतो जातु नाम गदाग्रज: ।१९॥
