548 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

Bet RRB Be BRE Re Ry ड हीं Re HEP FBR ह ता हो क ae ee Ee EH SAE ee ALY OEHHA ATER HER EEN AEE
पार्त्त न

श्रृणोति श्रावयति स उपगेयं भगवत: परमात्मनोऽग्राह्यमपि श्रद्धाभक्तिविशुद्धबुद्धिर्वेद | ३८ ।

The path characterized by Nivrtti or cessation of worldly activity (leading to final
beatitude) has been told in detail at the very outset (in Il. ii. 24 et seqq.). Of this extent only
is the egg-shaped universe, which is depicted in the Puranas as divided into fourteen
spheres and which is the (most) well-known (and) grossest form of the Supreme Person,
Bhagavan Narayana Himself, consisting (as it does) of the (three) Gunas (modes) of His own
Maya (deluding potency known by the name of Prakrti or matter). He who, full of reverence,
reads (all alone), hears (as recited by another) or recites (to another) the account of it (as)
told (by me) comes to realize even the incomprehensible (most subtle) aspect of the
Supreme Spirit, the theme of the Upanisads, his mind being purified through faith and
devotion. (38)

श्रुत्वा स्थूलं तथा Yad रूपं भगवतो यति: । स्थूले निर्जितमात्मानं शनै: सूक्ष्मं धिया नयेदिति। 3e 1

भूद्बीपवर्षसरिदद्रिनभ:समुद्रपातालदिङ्नरकभागणलोकसंस्था ।
गीता मया da नॄपाद्भुतमीश्र्वरस्य स्थूलं वपु: सकलजीवनिकायधाम।४०।

नरकानुवर्णनं WT षड्विंशोऽध्याय: । २६ ।

RUNS २ त्नं २८
PISS Si pores

इति पञ्चम: स्कन्ध: समाप्त:
।। हरि: Se तत्सत्॥

Having heard of the gross as well as of the subtle (incomprehensible) aspect of the Lord,
the striver should gradually fix his mind with the help of his subtle intellect on the subtle
aspect, when it has been fully concentrated on the gross aspect. (39) In this way has been
described by me for you, O king (Pariksit), the relative position of the earth with its (various)
divisions (Dwipas) and subdivisions (Varsas), rivers and mountains, of the aerial region, the
(Seven) oceans and the (seven) subterranean regions, the (four) quarters and the infernal
regions, as well as of the luminaries and the spheres, constituting the wonderful gross
(material) Body of the almighty Lord, (and) the abode of all species of living beings. (40)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse entitled "A description of the infernal regions" in Book
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramaharsa-Samhita, consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas,
composed by the (divine) sage Vedavyasa.

२१३.०१३ २२३१
PII Spr

END OF BOOK FIVE

cttacettive
PITS ERIS
