598 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

4११5 CONOR E RHEE POT ELEN TOUS कक शाक MERE EHH EROEC ODORANT HOHE NH सा शाल् न ग

contented with the food got from those houses (alone). (18) Going to a reservoir of water
(such as a pond or tank) outside the town or village, he should rinse his mouth there and,
allotting a (due) share to those deserving it (viz., Lord Visnu, Brahma, the sun-god and all
created beings) once it has been consecrated (by sprinkling with water and so on), he should
silently consume all the rest that was brought (by him—neither bringing more than was
required nor laying by anything for another time}. (19) With his senses fully controlled he
should perambulate this earth (all) alone and free from attachment, finding recreation and
delight in the Self, self-possessed and viewing all alike. (20) Dwelling ina lonely yet secure
abode and keeping his mind pure through devotion to Me, the sage should contemplate
on the Selfas one and undistinguishable from Me. (21) Byinquiring into the truth (of things)
he should investigate the true nature of bondage and liberation of the Self. Bondage
consists in the distraction of the senses and Liberation in their full control. (22) Therefore,
keeping in check the six senses (the five external senses and the mind, the internal sense)
and averse to the trifling pleasures of sense, and finding abundant joy in the Self, the
recluse should go about the world contemplating on Me. (23) He should perambulate the
earth full of holy tracts, rivers, mountains, woodlands and hermitages, entering towns
and villages, cowherd stations and caravanserais (only) for the sake of alms. (24) He
should often beg alms from the hermitages of anchorites; for, his mind being purified by
the (hemit's) food obtained by gleaning grains from the fields, he is rid of infatuation and
attains the goal of his life soon. (25)

faq वस्तुतया weae दृश्यमानं विनश्यति । असक्तचित्तो विरमेदिहामुत्र चिकीर्षितात् ।२६॥
यदेतदात्मनि जगन्मनोवाक्त्राणसंहतम् | सर्वं मायेति तर्केण स्वस्थस्त्यक्त्वा न तत् स्मरेत् । २७
ज्ञाननिष्ठो विरक्तो वा mam वानपेक्षक: । सलिङ्गानाश्रमांस्त्यक्त्वा चरेदविधिगोचर: । २८
बुधो बालकवत् क्रीडेत् gael जडवच्चरेत्। वदेदुन्मत्तवद् विद्वान् गोचर्यां नैगमश्चरेत् ।२९॥
वेदवादरतो न UA पाखण्डी न हैतुक: | शुष्कवादविवादे न कञ्चित् val समाश्रयेत् ।३०॥
Aiea जनाद् at जनं चोद्देजयेन्र तु । अतिवादांस्तितिक्षेत नावमन्येत कञ्चन ।
देहमुद्दिश्य पशुवद् at कुर्यान्न केनचित् । ३१1
एक wa परो ह्यात्मा भूतेघ्नात्मन्यवस्थित: । यथेन्दुरुदपात्रेषु भूतान्येकात्मकानि च । ३२

He should not regard this visible world as real because it is perishable. (Therefore,) with
his mind unattached to this world as well as to the next he should cease from every activity
intended (to secure the objects of senses). (26) Realizing by force of reasoning (on the
analogy of a dream) that all that exists (apart from the Self) viz., this (objective) universe
(regarded as “mine") as well as the body (and referred to as “I") conjoined with the mind,
speech and the vital air (alongwith the delights of sense) as a (mere) mental illusion
superimposed on the Self, and (therefore) turning his back on it, he should think no more of
itand remain established in the Self. (27) No longer governed by the scriptural ordinance,
he who is established in Self-Knowledge, though (outwardly) appearing as a seeker of
Liberation (averse to the pleasures of sense) ora devotee of Mine, seeking nothing (not even
Liberation), may do as he likes, renouncing (attachment to the duties of) the four Asramas
(stages of life) alongwith their distinguishing marks (such as the triple staff in the case of a
recluse). (28) Though sound of judgment, he should sport like a child (bereft of the sense of
honour and ignominy); though clever, he should behave like a dullard. Though learned he
should rave like a madman (inasmuch) as he has none to please by his speech); though
devoted to the intention of the Vedas, he should behave like an animal (observing no
consistency in his behaviour). (29) He should not take delight in expounding the section of

