680 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

करीजगजयज्छो जड ॐज्यजति द्छ व EKA HHRREKKEE KEKE ॐर इ कीं क ययेरो त्तहं री EET OHS के ककक HAHAHAHAHA

wealth and so on or (in the case of a sovereign) one's kingdom, treasury, elephants,
ministers, servants and friends, that are connected with the Jiva only indirectly (through the
body) and are treated as one's own (and not the very self) ! (44) Of what avail can these trifling
things—which are sure to disappear with the body and are (veritable) evils, though appearing
as something worth seeking—be to the soul, the very ocean of eternal bliss ? (45) (Just)
consider whatinterest (enjoyment) can there be in this world, O demon boys, to the embodied
soul, suffering through its (past) actions in all the stages commencing from conception (till
death)? (46) With the body as its (obedient) servant the embodied soul undertakes actions
(of various kinds, both good. and evil) and with (the aforesaid) acti6ns moulds a (future) body
(and the circle goes on from birth to birth) inasmuch as both (actions as well as the body)
proceed from ignorance. (47) Therefore, worship through desirelessness the desireless and
almighty Sri Hari, your very Self, on whom (our) riches, enjoyments and pious acts
depend.(48) Lord Sri Hari is the (very) Self, Ruler, beloved friend and Inner Controller of all
living beings (whose bodies have been) fashioned by gross elements evolved (in their turn)
by Himself. (49) Taking shelter under the feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation), a
god, demon, human being or Yaksa and even a Gandharva (a celestial musician) bids fair
to become blessed as I. (50)

aes fara tanga वासुरात्मजा:। प्रीणनाय मुकुन्दस्य न Gi न बहुन्नता ।५१।

न दानं न तपो नेज्या न whe न ब्रतानि च । प्रीयतेऽमलया ween हरिरन्यद् विडम्बनम् 42!

ततो at भगवति भक्तिं ged दानवा:। आत्मोपम्येन सर्वत्र सर्वभूतात्मनीश्वरे । ५३।

दैतेया यक्षरक्षांसि स्रिय: झद्रा व्रजोकस: । खगा मृगा: पापजीवा: सन्ति ह्यच्युततां गता: 14%

Wana लोकेऽस्मिन् पुंस: स्वार्थ: पर: स्मृत: | एकान्तभक्तिर्गोविन्दे यत् सर्वत्र तदीक्षणम् । ५५1

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां सप्तमस्कन्धे प्रह्रादानुचर्ति दैत्यपुत्रानुशासनं नाम सप्तमाऽध्याय: 1191
Neither birth as a member of the twice-born classes, god or Rsi nor character nor

versatility nor charity nor austerity nor the performance of sacrifices nor purity (of mind and
body) nor sacred vows are conducive to the pleasure of Lord Mukunda, O Asura boys ! Sri
Hari is propitiated through unalloyed Devotion (alone). All else is empty show. (51-52)
Therefore, practise devotion, O Danavas, tothe almighty Lord SriHari, the Soul of all created
beings, by treating every creature as though it were your very self. (53) For there are (many)
Daityas, Yaksas and ogres, womenfolk, Siidras (members of the labouring and artisan
classes), cowherds, birds, beasts and those living by sin that have attained immortality
(through Devotion). (54) Exclusive devotion to Lord Govinda (the Protector of cows)—which
is the same as beholding Him in every creature—this alone has been declared to be the
highest interest (goal) of man in this world. (55)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, entitled “ (Prahrada's) Teaching to the Daityas'
sons", forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada, in Book Seven of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

St Pt PT TS
CDOD EEN ENA OD
