240 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33

ZERO RESINOUS ORDER ISTE ITI STS SII Ror ee salieri

यं मन्येरन् नभस्तावद् विमानदतसङ्कुलम्। दिवौकसां सदाराणामौत्सुक्यापहतात्मनाम् । ४ ।
तत्तो दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्निपेतु पुष्पवृष्टय: । जगुर्गन्धर्वपतय: सस्त्रीकास्तद्यञ्ञोऽमलम् । ५ ।
बलयानां नूपुराणां किङ्किणीनां च योषिताम्।सप्रियाणामभूच्छव्दस्तुमुलो रासमण्डले । ६ |
तत्रातिशुशुभे ताभिर्भगवान् देवकीसुत: | मध्ये मणीनां हैमानां महामरकतो यथा । ७ ।
स्विद्यन्मुख्य: कबररशानाग्रन्थय: कृष्णवध्वो गायन्त्यस्तं तडित ga ता मेघचक्रे विरेजु: । ८ ।
उच्चैर्जगुर्नृत्यमाना सरक्तकण्ठयो रतिप्रिया: | कृष्णाभिमर्छामुदितो यद्गीतेनेदमावृतम् । ९ ।
काचित् सर्मं सुकुन्देन स्वरजातीरमिश्रिता: । उन्निन्ये पूजिता aa प्रीयता arg साध्विति ।
तदेव ध्रुवमुन्निन्ये तस्यै मानं च बह्वदात् । १०1

काचिद् रासपरिश्रान्ता पार्श्वस्थस्य गदाभृत: | जग्राह बाहुना स्कन्धं श्लथट्बलयमल्लिका । ११।
तत्रैकांसगतं बाहुं कृष्णस्योत्पलसोरभम्।चन्दनालिप्तमाघ्राय हृष्टरोमा PT ह ।१२॥
कस्याश्चिन्नाट्यविक्षिप्तकुण्डलत्विषमण्डितम् । गण्डं गण्डे सन्दधत्या अदान्ताम्बूलचर्वितम् । १३।
Jeet गायती काचित् कूजन्नूपुरमेखला | पार्श्वस्थाच्युतहस्ताब्जं श्रान्ताधात्स्तनयो: fare । १४॥

(Now) commenced duly the festive dance of Rasa adorned with the circle of the aforesaid
Gopis standing with their necks encircled by (the arms of) Sri Krsna, the Master of Yoga
(inconceivable powers), who (appeared to have) introduced Himself (in so many identical
forms) between every two Gopis, and whom those (cowherd) women imagined to be by their
own side. Presently the firmament was thronged with hundreds of aerial cars of heavenly
beings, who were accompanied by their consorts and whose mind had been carried away
by curiosity (in the form of a longing to behold Sri Krsna). (3-4) Then sounded kettle-drums
(beaten by heavenly beings), showers of flowers fell, and the chiefs of Gandharvas sang His
immaculate glory in chorus with their spouses. (5) There arose a confused din produced by
(the jingling of) bangles and anklets and (the tinkling of) tiny bells attached to the girdle of
the cowherd women joined with their beloved Lord in that ring of Rasa dancers. (6) There in
the company of those girls Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) shone exceedingly bright like
a large emerald* strung in the midst of (every two) gold beads. (7) With their (measured)
treads, the motions of their hands, the playful movemenis of their eye-brows, accompanied
with (graceful) smiles, bending waists, shaking breasts and fluttering skirts of their garments,
ear-rings rocking against their cheeks, perspiring faces, and their braids and girdles loosened
(on account of their swift movement) and celebrating the Lord in song, the aforesaid darlings
of Sri Krsna shone brightly like flashes of lightning in a mass of clouds. (8) Engaged in
dancing and delighted with the touch of Sri Krsna, the Gopis—whose voice was sweetened
with love, (nay,) whose (sole) delight was loving devotion (to Sri Krsna) and whose music
filled (the whole of) this universe—sang at the pitch of their voice. (9) Singing in chorus with
Sri Krsna a certain Gopi (Vigakha) struck at a high pitch notes (altogether) different (from
those of Sri Krsna) and was applauded by the !atter—who felt (much) delighted (by her
performance)—in the words, “Well done !", "Bravo !". Another girl (presumably Lalita)
reproduced the same tune at the top of her voice according to the measure of time technically
known by the name of Dhruvapada (Dhrupad) and the Lord showed abundant regard to her
(for her excellent performance). (10) Fully tired by the Rasa dance, another Gop! (probably
SriRadha) clasped with her arm the shoulder of Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu,
and) who stood by her side, her bangles slipping (from her wrists) andjasmine flowers dropping

* StiKrsnais said to possess the hue of the sapphire. Here He has beenlikened to an emerald apparenily due to His colour
being blended with the golden hue of ihe Gopis and thus appeanng green rather than cerulean
