Dis. 29 ] BOOK ELEVEN 655

because of their not being able to compose it. (2) It is for this very reason that men who are
capable of distinguishing the substantial from the unsubstantial easily and definitely resort
to Your lotus-feet, yielding (the nectar of) supreme bliss, O lotus-eyed Lord of the universe!
Handicapped (however) are they by Your Maya (deluding potency), who, being proudof their
Self-Knowledge and (knowledge of) ritual acts, do not (so) resort to You! (3) That You should
be subject to the will of Your servants (devotees) that are exclusively devoted to You, O
Befriender of all, is no wonder for You, O immortal Lord ! who found delight in the company
of animals (monkeys ete.,in Your descent as Sri Rama as well as in Your infantile sports at
Vrindabana), even though Your very footstool is (ever and anon) rubbed by the end of the
brilliant diadems of Brahma and others (the rulers of the world)! (4) What man who is
conscious of good offices done (by you) to Your devotees (in the past) can possibly turn his
back on You as aforesaid, the Ruler and the Beloved, (nay,) the very Self of the entire
creation, who bestow all desired boons upon those that have sought shelter with You ? What
(knowing) man will as a matter of fact go in for something (other than You, even though gifted
by You,) which is conducive to good fortune (alone) and later on, to forgetfulness (about You) ?
What good fortune will not attend on us, who take delight in the dust of Your feet ? (5) (Even)
enlightened souls cannot get square with You, O Lord! even through the span of life allotted
to Brahma (viz., 31,10,40,00,00,00,000 years) and feel overjoyed while recalling Your
obligations; for (they know that) appearing in the form of the preceptor outside andin the form
of the Inner Controller within (their heart) itis You who drive away the sin (and impurities) of
embodied souls and reveal! Your true nature (to them).(6)

इत्युद्धवेनात्यनुरक्तचेतसा पृष्टो जगत्क्रीडनक: स्वदाक्तिभि: ।
गृहीतमूर्तित्रय ईश्वरेश्वरो जगाद सप्रेममनोहरस्मित: । ७ |
Sri Suka began again: Ouestioned thus by Uddhava, whose mind was excessively
devoted to Him, Sri Krsna (the suzerain Lord even of Brahma and others, the rulers of the
universe), who, having assumed three forms (under the names of Brahma, Visnu and Siva)
through His own potencies (in the shape of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas), toys with the world,
lovingly spoke (as follows) with a soul-ravishing smile (on His lips). (7)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
हन्त a कथयिष्यामि मम धर्मान् सुमङ्गलान्। याञ्छृद्धयाऽऽचरन् vet मृत्युं जयति दुर्जयम् । ८ |
कुर्यात् सर्वाणि कर्माणि ced ach: स्मरन्। मय्यर्पितमनश्चित्तो मद्धर्मात्ममनोरति: । ९ ।
देशान् पुण्यानाश्रयेत मद्धक्तै: साधुभि: श्रितान्। देवासुरमनुष्येषु मद्धक्ताचर्तानि च ।१०॥
पृथक सत्रेण वा मह्यं पर्वयात्रामहोत्सवान्। कारयेद् गीतनॄत्याद्यैर्महाराजविभूतिभि: ।११।
ama सर्वभूतेषु बहिरन्तरपावृतम् । ईक्षेतात्मनि चात्मानं यथा खममलाशय: 1221
इति सर्वाणि भूतानि मद्धावेन महाद्युते। सभाजयन् मन्यमानो ज्ञानं केवलमाश्रित: ।१३।
ब्रह्वाणेपुस्वासेस्वेनेब्रह्मण्टौकिंस्फूक्खिके।उग्कूरेक्वक्केवैवसक्तूझपण्डितौफा:।९४।
नरेषभीक्ष्णं wad पुंसो भावयतोऽचिरात्। स्पर्धासूयातिरस्कारा: साहङ्कारा वियन्ति fe ।१५॥
विसृज्य स्मयमानान् स्वान् दृशं व्रीडां च दैहिकीम् । प्रणमेद दण्डवद् भूमावाश्वचाण्डालगोखरम् । १६॥
यावत् सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्धावो नोपजायते । तावदेवमुपासीत वाङ्मन:कायवृत्तिभि: । १७॥
wd ब्रह्मात्मके aa विद्ययाऽऽत्ममनीषया । परिपञ्यन्नुपरमेत् सर्वतो मुक्तसंशाय: । १८॥
aa fe सर्वकल्पानां सध्रीचीनो मतो aging: सर्वभूतेषु मनोवाक्कायवृत्तिभि: ।१९।
