34 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5
PER MAEM RS HORT BY RW, HARE SHR SAT BONE eR BTR BE A ETB BY ROR Ri Re SH Re BR Be HOR BRR WOR TAR ROR A RIOR Rot RR eRe a ira
rid by you of the deluded form of a spectre. (52) Blessed is the exposition of Srimad
Bhagavata, which drives away once for all the agony a spectre is heir to. And praiseworthy
is a Seven days' reading of Srimad Bhagavata, which bestows (on the hearers) as its reward
an abode in the realm of Sri Krsna. (53) When a seven days' reading of Srimad Bhagavata
is at hand, all the sins shudder to think that the contemplated exposition will bring about their
dissolution apace. (54) (Even) as a fire consumes (all kinds of) pieces of wood—whether
moist or dry, small or big, so does a (seven days') hearing of Srimad Bhagavata eradicate
(all kinds of) sin—whether recent or of long standing, minor or major, and perpetrated in
thought, word or deed. (55)

afer a भारते ad सूरिभिर्देवसंसदि। अकथाश्राविणां पुंसां निष्फलं जन्म कीर्तितम् । ५६॥
fe मोहतो रक्षितेन सुपुष्टेन बलीयसा। अध्रुवेण झरीरेण amare विना । ५७॥
अस्थिस्तम्भं स्नायुबद्धुं मांसशोणितलेपितम्। चर्मावनद्धुं «oat पात्रं मूत्रपुरीषयो: yc
जराशोकविपाकार्तं रोगमन्दिरमातुरम्। दुष्पूरं दुर्धरं दुष्टं सदोषं क्षणभङ्गुरम् ।५९॥
कृमिविड्भस्मसंज्ञान्तं ङारीरमिति वर्णितम्। अस्थिरेण स्थिरं कर्म कुतोऽयं साधयेन्न हि । ६०॥
aad: संस्कृतं चान्नं aa aa विनश्यति। तदीयरससम्पुष्टे काये का नाम नित्यता । ६१॥

It has actually been declared by the wise in an assembly of the gods that the birth in this
(land of) Bharatavarsa of men who fail to hear the story of Srimad Bhagavatais fruitless. (56)
If one does not get to hear an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata (the scripture associated with
the name of Sri Suka), of what avail is this unstable body, maintained through excessive
fondness, nourished well and made stronger ? (57) The body is supported on a column of
bones, held together by (a network of) nerves and tendons, mortared with flesh and blood
and covered all over with skin; (nay) it is full of bad smell, being a receptacle of urine and
faeces. Itis (ever) afflicted with old age, sorrow and metamorphosis, is the home of diseases,
frail, difficult to satisfy, hard to maintain, corrupt, faulty and momentary. It has been
characterized as having its finality in what goes by the name of worms (if itis buried), faeces
(if itis devoured by vultures and crows, dogs andjackals) and ashes (if itis cremated). Why,
then, should one not perform with this unstable body action leading to immortality ? (658—60)
What permanence can possibly be ascribed to an organism nourished with the essence of
a foodstuff (such as rice) which, if it is dressed in the morning, gets rotten by the (same)
evening ? (61)

सप्ताहश्रवणाल्लोके प्राप्यते निकटे हरि: at दोषनिवृत्त्यर्थमेतदेव fe साधनम् । ६२।
बुदबुदा Fa तोयेषु मशका इव जन्तुषु। जायन्ते मरणायैव कथाश्रवणवर्जिता: । ६३।
wea YR यत्र ग्रन्थिविभेदनम्। चित्रं किमु तदा चित्तग्रन्थिभेद: कथाश्रवात् । ६४॥
भिद्यते हृदयग्रन्थिख्छिद्यनत्ते सर्वसंशया: । क्षीयन्ते चास्य कर्माणि सप्ताहश्रवणे कृते ।६५॥
संसारकर्दमालेपप्रक्षालनपटीयसि । कथातीर्थे स्थिते चित्ते मुक्तिरेव qa: स्मृता । ६६॥

Through the hearing of a seven days’ exposition of Srimad Bhagavata Sri Hari is brought
within one's reach. Hence the aforesaid indeed is the only means of driving away {all kinds
of ) sins. (62) Like bubbles appearing in water or mosquitoes among living beings, those who
remain deprived of hearing an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata are born only to die. (63)
When the joints of a dry bamboo, a (purely) material substance, could be broken open
through the hearing of such an exposition, what wonder, then, if the knot ( of ignorance) in
the mind gets (similarly) snapped (thereby) ? (64) The aforesaid knot in the heart is broken,
doubts of every kind get resolved and ( the residue of ) past Karma gets eliminated when a
