444 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 77

आनमा CARE EEK CEH ERAN १८ १99 TEAR आ EERE ER RROREHE ER ERENTACEREMH १9क RRS गक ER

by Salva, just as a butcher drags an animal to be slaughtered." (22) Hearing this unpleasant
news, Bhagavan Sri Krsna exhibited the play of human emotions. Troubled at heart and full
of compassion and filial affection like an ordinary human being, He said: (23) “ How is it that
My Brother, who cannotbe subdued or daunted even by gods or Asuras, has beenovercome
by Salva, who though a pygmy before Him has succeeded in carrying away our father ?
Indeed, Providence is all-powerful." (24) While Sri Krsna was saying this, Salva made his
appearance before Him holding Vasudeva as it were, and said to Him (as follows): (25) "O
fool, here is your father who has brought you into being and for whom you live. | shall slay
him before your eyes. Save him, if you can. “ (26) Uttering this threat, that master of magic,
Salva cut off the head of that (seeming) Vasudeva ana, taking it with him, withdrew into his
aerial car, Saubha, which stood near him in the air. (27) (Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is
the embodiment of perfect wisdom by nature and has limitless power. Due to affection for
his father, He remained plunged in sorrow, like an ordinary human being, for a moment. But
presently He understood that it was nothing but an illusion created by Salva, who was taught
this art by the Asura named Maya. (28) As He fully recovered from the spell of Maya, SriKrsna
found that both the messenger and the body of His father had vanished from the battle-fiela
like visions seen in a dream. Observing Salva at this moment in his flying aerial car, the Lord
resolved to kill him. (29)

wa वदन्ति राजर्षे ऋषय: के च नान्विता: | यत् ward विरुध्येत नूनं a न स्मरन्त्युत । ३०॥
क्व शोकमोहौ aa वा भयं वा येऽज्ञसम्भवा: । क्व चाखण्डितविज्ञानज्ञानैश्चर्यस्त्वखण्डित: 1381
यत्पादसेवोर्जितयाऽऽत्मविद्यया हिन्वन्त्यनाद्यात्मविपर्ययग्रहम् ।
लभन्त आत्मीयमनन्तमैश्वे कुतो नु मोह: परमस्य FA ।३२॥

Pariksit, this is the version of a few Rsis, who do not care so much for consistency. Surely
they forget that such statements with reference to Bhagavan Sri Krsna contradict their own
statements made on other occasions. (30) Grief, infatuation, attachment and fear—these
find place only in the ignorant. They cannot be attributed to Bhagavan Sri Krsna ( the Perfect
Being), the embodiment of perfect knowledge, wisdom and glory. (31) The greatest of sages
worship the lotus-like feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna and thereby attain the knowledge of the
Self, which roots out ignorance existing from time without beginning in the form of
identification of the self with the body and gain infinite spiritual glory. How can the Lord, who
is the sole refuge of such sages, be subject to delusion ? (32)

a Teg: प्रहरन्तमोजसा med oat शौरिरमोत्घविक्रम: ।
विद्ध्वाच्छिनद् at aq: शिरोमणिं सौभं च ङात्रोर्गदया रुरोज ह ।३३॥
तत् कृष्णहस्तेरितया विचूर्णितं पपात तोये गदया सहस्रधा ।
विसृज्य ae भूतलमास्थितो गदामुद्यम्य झाल्वोऽच्युतमभ्यगाद् द्रुतम् 1३४॥
आधावत: सगदं तस्य बाहुं भल्लेन छित्त्वाथ रथाङ्गमद्भुतम् ।
वधाय wea लयार्कसन्निभं fave बभो arch इवोदयाचल: ।३५॥
वज्रेण वृत्रस्य यथा पुरन्दरो aya हाहेति वचस्तदा नृणाम् 1३६॥
तस्मिन् fafa पापे सौभे च गदया हते । नेदुर्दुन्दुभयो राजन् दिवि देवगणेरिता: |
सखीनामपचितिं कुर्वन् दन्तवक्त्रो रुषाभ्यगात् । ३७
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे सौभवधो नाम सप्तसप्ततितमाऽध्याय. ॥७७]
