748 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4
LRRD OR ELAN EI CEE EE OF EET EE RATE HE EM EER RR HE BP RT OA ee डि
seized inside the lake by the mighty alligator and felt (much) distressed, uttered with (great)
difficulty (on account of pain) the words "Hail to You, O Lord Narayana, the Preceptor of the
universe !” (32) Perceiving the elephant afflicted and alighting all at once (from the back of
Garuda) out of (extreme) compassion, the birthless Sri Hari speedily pulled the king of the
elephants (by its trunk) along with the alligator out of the lake and, (even) while the gods stood
looking on, extricated it from (the hold of) the alligator, whose jaws had been rent open with
the discus. (33)

Thus ends the third discourse, bearing on the deliverance of the king of the elephants,
in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

.ने ay
eo Sieve

AY चतुर्थोऽध्याय:

Discourse IV
Deliverance of the lord of the elephants

AY उवाच
तदा देवर्षिगन्धर्वा ब्रह्मेशानपुरोगमा: । मुमुत्रु: कुसुमासारं stat: कर्म ast 1 १ ।
नेदुर्दुन्दुभयो दिव्या गन्धर्वा ननॄतुर्जगु: । ॠषयश्चारणा: सिद्धास्तुष्टुबु: पुरुषोत्तमम् 2 |
योऽसो ग्राह: स वै सद्य: परमाश्चर्यरूपधृक् । मुक्तो देवलश्ञापेन हूहूर्गन्धर्वसत्तम: । ३ ।
प्रणम्य शिरसाधीदामुत्तमर्लोकमव्ययम्। अगायत यजञ्ञोधाम कीर्तन्यगुणसत्कथम् । ४ ।
सोऽनुकम्पित gq परिक्रम्य sora तम्।लोकस्य पश्यतो लोकं स्वमगान्मुक्तकिल्बिष: । ५ ।

Sri Suka resumed: Applauding the aforesaid feat of Lord Sti Hari, the gods, Rsis (seers)
and Gandharvas (present there), headed by Brahma (the creator) and Lord Siva, discharged
(from the air) a shower of flowers (on the person of the Lord by way of felicitation). (1)
Heavenly drums sounded; the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) danced and sang (songs
of praise); while Rsis, Caranas (celestial bards) and Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed
with mystic powers from their very birth) glorified the supreme Person. (2) That which was
(till now) an alligator due to the curse of the sage Devala* has been (in his previous
incarnation) the foremost of the Gandharvas, Hahd (by name). Redeemed (from that curse
by the Lord), it forthwith assumed a really most wonderful form.(3) Bowing with his head (bent
low), he hymned the supreme immortal Lord of excellent renown, the Abode of (all) glory,
whose (innumerable) virtues and sacred stories (alone) are worth celebrating. (4) (Thus)
favoured by the Lord, he had (all) his sins washed away; and, walking round Him(as a token
of reverence) from left to right and greeting Him, he returned to his home (the realm of the
Gandharvas) while the (whole) assembly (of gods and seers present there) stood gazing
(with wonder).(5)

गजेन्द्रो भगवत्स्पर्शाद् विमुक्तोऽज्ञानबन्धनात्। प्राप्तो भगवतो रूपं पीतवासाश्चतुर्भुज: । ६ |

a a पूर्वमभूद राजा पाण्ड्यो द्रविडसत्तम: ss इति waa विष्णुव्रतपरायण: । ७ |

*We are told that this Gandharva was once sporting ina lake along with a number of women. The sage Devala too entered
the lake for a bath at that precise hour. Seeing him enter the lake, the haughty Gandharva pulled him by the leg under water.
The sage, who at once knew who had played the prank, cursed Huhd that he would be thrown into the womb of an alligator.
