106 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2
= ककक

Jeet ir fr 8 ar $f rererer anion fin foto init teeter #2 ein:

universe), did not shine fully (failed to delight the outside world). (19) Perceiving Devaki—
who bore the invincible Lord within her—illumining the palace by her (uncommon) lustre and
having a bright smile (on her countenance), Karhsa said (to himself): “Hari, who is going to
take my life, has clearly and surely entered her womb, like a lion entering a cave; for she was
not like this (so bright) before. (20) What should be speedily done by me now with reference
to him? For (if | attempt to make short work of him, the moment he is born) he is not going
to withhold his prowess (even as a new-born babe would do), intent ashe is on his purpose
(of advancing the interests of the gods). (And if | dispose of Devaki herself, before my enemy
is born,) such destruction of Devaki (my cousin), who is not only a woman but enceinte (too),
will forthwith mar my reputation and prosperity and cut short my life.(21) Sucha one is indeed
{as good as) dead, though breathing, who lives by most atrocious deeds; (for) people curse
such aman (even during his lifetime) and, when his body gets defunct, he is surely destined
to go to hell (consisting of blinding darkness), the inevitable fate of one identifying oneself
with the body." (22) Pondering thus, Karnsa, though powerful himself, ceased from that
darkest design (of killing Devakl) and kept awaiting the birth of Sri Hari, cherishing a feeling
of enmity for Him. (23) Thinking of Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) while sitting, lying
down, standing, taking his food and walking on earth, he saw the world full of Him. (24)
ब्रह्मा wag cae मुनिभिर्नारदादिभि: 12a: सानुचरै: साकं गीर्भिर्वृषणमैडयन् ।२५॥

सत्यव्रतं vet fad सत्यस्य योनिं ff च ad)

सत्यस्य सत्यमृतसत्यनेत्रॆ सत्यात्मकॆ ST: ।२६॥

एकायनोऽसौ द्विफलस्तरिमूलश्चतूरस: पञ्चविध: षडात्मा ।

weet नवाक्षो दशच्छदी द्विखगो ह्यादिवृक्ष: ।२७॥

wie wr wa: प्रसूतिस्त्वं सन्निधानं त्वमनुग्रहश्च ।

त्वन्मायया संवृतचेतसस्त्वां wah am न feof ये ।२८॥

बिभर्षि रूपाण्यवबोधं आत्मा क्षेमाय लोकस्य च्चराचरस्य ।

सत्त्वोपपन्नानि सुखावहानि सतामभद्राणि ae: खलानाम् ।२९॥

त्वत्पादपोतेन महत्कृतेन कुर्वन्ति गोवत्सपदं भवाब्धिम् ।३०॥

भवत्पदाम्भोरुहनावमत्र ते निधाय aT: सदनुग्रहो भवान् ।३१॥

चेऽन्येऽरविन्दाक्ष विमुक्तमानिनस्त्वव्यस्तभावादविशुद्धबुद्धय: |

आफुह्य FET परं पदं तत: पतन्त्यघोऽनादृतयुष्मदङ्भ्रय: 1321

तथा न ते माधव तावका: क्वचिद् भ्रह्यन्ति मार्गात्त्वयि बद्धसौहृदा: ।

त्वयाभिगुप्ता विचरन्ति निर्भया विनायकानीकपमूर्धसु प्रभो 1331

वेदक्रियायोगतप:समाधिभिस्तवार्हणं येन जन: समीहते ।३४॥

wa न deme निजं भवेद विज्ञानमज्ञानभिदापमार्जनम् ।

TERA भवान् wat यस्य च येन वा गुण: ।३५॥

न नामरूपे गुणजन्मकर्मभिर्निरूपितव्ये wa तस्य साक्षिण: ।
