54 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14
treet’

REREHEESSEER SHEE 3 ०२०२ २०२२ SHEE २२ २२२२ २२२२ २२२ २२२ २२ २२२२२२२२ २२११ ELE AE REL ENE HT

AA ऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV

A brief survey of the Lunar Dynasty
Pireg उवाच
अथात: श्रूयतां राजन् aa: सोमस्य पावन: । यस्मिन्नैलादयो भूपा: कीर्त्यन्ते पुण्यकीर्तय: । १ ।
सहस्रशिरस: पुंसो नाभिह्रदसरोरुहात्। जातस्यासीत् सुतो धातुरत्रि: पितृसमो गुणै: । २ ।
qe दृग्भ्योऽभवत् पुत्र: सोमोऽमृतमय: किल । विप्रौषध्युडुगणानां ब्रह्मणा कल्पित: पति: । ३ ।
सोऽयजद् राजसूयेन विजित्य भुवनत्रयम्। पत्नीं बृहस्पतेर्दर्पात् तारां नामाहरद् बलात्। |
wal स देवगुरुणा याचितोऽभीक्ष्णश्ञो मदात्।नात्यजत् तत्कृते जज्ञे सुरदानवविग्रह: । ५ ।
WR बृहस्पतेर्देषादग्रहीत् सासुरोडुपम्।हरो गुरुसुतं स्नेहात् सर्वभूतगणावृत: । ६ ।
सर्वदेवगणोपेतो मह्रेन्रो गुरुमन्वयात्।सुरासुरविनाशोऽभूत् समरस्तारकामय: । ७ |
उत्त Suka began again : Now hereafter hear, O king, of the hallowed race of Soma (the
moon-god), in which are mentioned kings of sacred renown such as Aila (King Purtrava, the
son of tla). (1) Of Brahma (the creator), sprung of the lotus (in the form of the cosmos) evolved
out of the pool-like navel of the (supreme) Cosmic person possessed of countless heads,
there was a son, Atri (by name), who was a replica of his father in point of excellences. (2)
Out of his tears of joy, so the tradition goes, sprang up a son, Soma (by name), who is an
embodiment of nectar. He was appointed by Brahma as the lord of the Brahmanas, herbs
and annual plants, as well as of the hosts of stars. (3) Having completely subdued all the
three worlds, he worshipped the Lord by means of a Rajasilya sacrifice and out of arrogance
he forcibly carried away the wife of the sage Brhaspati, Tara (by name). (4) Though solicited
time and again by the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods), he did notleave her through
vanity. On that account there ensued a war between the gods and the demons. (5) Due to
jealousy towards Brhaspati, Sukracarya (the preceptor of the demons) together with the
Asuras took the side of the moon-god (the ruler of the stars); while Lord Siva (the Destroyer
of the Universe), surrounded (accompanied) by all the hosts of ghosts espoused the cause
of Brhaspati (son of the sage Angira, the teacher of Lord Siva) due to his affection (for
Brhaspati). (6) Accompanied by all the hosts of heaven, the mighty Indra followed Brhaspati.
(In this way) there raged a battle for the sake of Tara, which caused the annihilation of (both)
the gods and the Asuras.(7)

निवेदितोऽथाङ्गिरसा सोमं निर्भर्त्य विश्वकृत्। ant स्वभत्रे प्रायच्छदन्तर्वत्नीमवैत् पति: । ८ ।
aa त्यजाशु gee मस्षेत्रादाहितं परै: । नाहंत्वांभस्मसात्कुर्यांस्तियं सान्तानिक: सति । ९ ।
तत्याज व्रीडिता तारा कुमारं कनकप्रभम्। स्पृहामाङ्गिरसश्चक्रे कुमारे सोम TT च ।१०॥
mat न तवेत्युच्चैस्तस्मिन् विवदमानयो: । पप्रच्छुर्ऋषयो देवा नैवोचे व्रीडिता तु सा 1११।
कुमारो मातरं प्राह कुपितोऽलीकलज्जया । किं न वोचस्यसद्वृत्ते आत्पावद्यं वदाशु मे 1१२॥
ब्रह्मा a रह आहूय समप्राक्षीच्च सान्त्वयन्। सोमस्येत्याह WAS: सोमस्तं तावद्ग्रहीत् ।१३॥
तस्यात्मयोनिरकृत बुधं इत्यभिधां नृप। बुद्ध्या गम्भीरया येन पुत्रेणापोडुराण्मुदम् । १४॥
at पुरूरवा wR goat य उदाहृत: । तस्य रूपगुणौदार्यञ्लीलद्रविणविक्रमान् eu!
श्रुत्वोर्वशीन्द्रभवने गीयमानान् सुरर्षिणा । तदन्तिकमुपेयाय देवी स्मरशरार्दिता । १६॥
