Dis. 23] BOOK TEN 207

OR BRR ROR TY RON ever Tots Er rer eg te Oe ter a aa te He

ननु स्वार्थविमूढानां प्रमत्तानां गृहेहया । Set न: स्मारयामास गोपवाक्यै: सतां गति: ।४४।

अन्यथा पूर्णकामस्य कैवल्याद्यार्जिषां ua: । ईशितव्यै: किमस्माभिरीशास्यैतद् विडम्बनम् isu

हित्वान्यान् भजते यं of: पादस्पर्शाशया सकृत्। आत्मदोषापवर्गेण तद्याच्ञा जनमोहिनी ve

देश: wie: JR मन्त्रतन्त्रत्विजोऽग्नय: ita यजमानश्च क्रतुर्धर्मश्चं aa: sel

स एष भगवान् साक्षाद् विष्णुर्योगेश्वरेश्चर: । जातो चदुष्ठित्यशृण्म ह्यपि मूढा न विद्महे isc

aa ad धन्यतमा येषां नस्तादृशी: स्रिय: | भक्त्या यासां मतिर्जाता अस्माकं निश्चला हरौ 1४९1

wT भगवते कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे | यन्मायामोहितधियो भ्रमाम: कर्मवर्त्मसु ॥५०॥

स वै न आद्य: पुरुष: स्वमायामोहितात्मनाम्। अविज्ञातानुभावानां क्षन्तुमर्हत्यतिक्रमम् 1५१1
Presently the aforesaid Brahmanas were filled with remorse to realize {through the
fellowship of their pious and devoted wives) that they had committed an offence in that they
turned down the solicitation of Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Rulers of the universe), who were
behaving as men. (37) Perceiving the transcendent devotion of their womenfolk to Lord Sri
Krsna and full of regret to find themselves devoid of it, they severely condemned themselves
(as follow):—-(38) "Fie upon our threefold birth (in the shape of our being born of Brahmana
parents, investiture with the sacred thread and consecration for the sacrifice in which we are
engaged) and learning (mastery of the Vedas), fie upon our sacred vow (of continence for
the period of the sacrifice); fie upon our versatile knowledge: fie upon our pedigree and fie
upon our proficiency in rituals when we have actually turned our face away from Lord Sri
Krsna (who is above sense-perception). (39) Indeed the Lord’s Maya (deluding potency) is
capable of infatuating even those who are adept in Yoga (abstract meditation). That is why
we, who are Brahmanas and (therefore) teachers of men, are ignorant of our real
interest.(40) O look at the devotion even of (our) women to Sri Krsna, the Father of the
universe, the depth of which cannot be easily fathomed by us and which has cut asunder the
snares of death going by the name of household ties (that bound them) ! (41) Neither was
the purificatory rite, (viz., that of investiture with the sacred thread) which is peculiar to the
males of the twice-born classes undergone by them, nor did they reside in the preceptor's
house (for learning the Vedas). No austerities were ever performed by them, nor was any
enquiry made about the Spirit. Nor is purity (of personal habits) seen in them, nor (again) do
any virtuous acts characterize them. (42)Yet there is actually found in them unswerving
devotion to Sri Krsna of excellent renown, the Lord of (ail) masters of Yoga: while it does not
appear in us, who have undergone the aforesaid purificatory rite and are endowed with all
the other qualifications (mentioned in the foregoing verse). (43) Oh, the Lord (who is the
mainstay and the goal of the virtuous) awakened through the words of the cowherd boys us,
who were surely deluded in the matter of our (real) self-interest and whose judgment had
been vitiated by our household activities! (44) Otherwise what could He gain through us, who
are subject to His control—He who has all His desires fulfilled and who is capable of
bestowing all blessings, the highest of them being final beatitude ? And His begging food of
us (too) was a mere imitation. (45) Supplication (for boiled rice) on the part of the Lord—
whom Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) constantly waits upon with the hope of
securing the touch of His feet, renouncing all others (Brahma and so on, who sought Her
favour) and giving up Her own faults of fickleness etc.—deludes the (common) people. (46)
We have actually heard that the selfsame Lord Visnu, the Ruler of (all) masters of Yoga—
who constitutes the time and place of performing a sacrifice, the diverse substances
(intended for being offered to the sacrificial fire), the mystic formulae (employed for invoking
the various deities and recited while pouring oblations into the sacred fire), the procedure of
conducting a sacrifice, the priests officiating at a sacrifice, the sacrificial fires, the divinities
