8 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2
OR Re त ह RR ee Re Re eee Rd
up their abode in places of pilgrimage; hence the value of sacred places is gone. (72) Even
those whose mind is agitated with passion, anger excessive greed and thirst for pleasure
have (outwardly) taken to an ascetic life, hence the value of askesis is gone. (73) Due to want
of control over the mind, greed and hypocrisy and due to people embracing heretic doctrines
and abstaining from the study of sacred books, the fruit of Dhyanayoga (the practice of
meditation) has (also) disappeared. (74) The learned (Panditas) for their part indulge in
sexual commerce with their wives like buffaloes. They are expert in procreating children and
are not (at all) clever in achieving Liberation. (75) Devotion to Lord Visnu, following the
traditions of a particular sect, is nowhere to be seen. In this way the substance of things has
disappeared everywhere. (76) Such, however, is the spirit of the times ( we are living in), as
a matter of fact . Who (else) is to be blamed for it ? That is why the lotus-eyed Lord (Visnu)
toterates (all) this, though abiding (so) close to us (in our very heart). (77)

सूत उवाच
sft cae श्रुत्वा विस्मयं परमं गता ।भक्तिरूचे at भूय: श्रूयतां तच्च alas ।७८]।

Stita went on : struck with great wonder to hear this admonition of Narada, Bhakti spoke
the following words once more. Listen to them, O Saunaka ! (78)

भक्तिरुवाच
aa त्वं हि धन्योऽसि मद्भाग्येन ware: । साधूनां दर्शनं लोके सर्वसिद्धिकरं परम् 1081
ध्रुवपदमपि यातो यत्कृपातो ध्रुवोऽयं सकलकुशलपात्रं ब्रह्मपुत्रं नतास्मि । ८०।
इति श्रीपद्मपुराणे उत्तरखण्डे श्रीमद्भागवतमाहात्म्ये भक्तिनारदसमागमो नाम प्रथमोऽध्याय: ॥ १॥

Bhakti said :You are indeed blessed, O celestial sage! You have come (here) through
my good luck, The sight of pious souls is the best means of accomplishing everything in this
world, (79) | bow to you, son of Brahma, the recipient of all blessings, treasuring whose single
teaching Prahrada (son of Kayadhi) was able in this world to conquer Maya, and by whose
grace the celebrated prince Dhruva too attained an everlasting abode. (80)

Thus ends the first discourse entitled "The Meeting of Bhakti with Narada”
forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" in the Uttara-
Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana.

Kat Bet Paya OL
PICIRER EE res

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
A Dialogue between the Kumaras and Narada

ARG उवाच
qm खेदयसे we अहो चिन्तातुरा कथम्। श्रीकृष्णचरणाम्भोजं स्मर दु:खं गमिष्यति । १ |
द्रौपदी च uf a कोरवकश्मलात्।पालिता गोपसुन्दर्य: स कृष्ण: क्वापि नो गत: । २ |
त्वं तु भक्ति: fren तस्य सततं प्राणतोऽधिका | त्वयाऽऽहूतस्तु भगवान् याति नीचगृहेष्नपि । ३ ।
