36 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ‘{ Dis. 9

BER Me यरी Re Re HEHE REGS क ती न क RT RR Re BWR Be Be RT Re Re Be OT Gy Br BA Be Hr Ber es Pe KD, Hy A PE ee Ph ee क क ककतज्ये व न्वि

foremost of the Yadus), who, while retaining His own blissful character all along, sometimes
assumes His own Prakrti (Maya) in order to carry on His sport, from which flows the stream
of creation. (32) May | cherish motiveless love for Sri Krsna, the friend of Vijaya (Arjuna), who
has assumed a personality charming to the'three worlds and dark as the Tamala tree, and
is clad in excellent robes, brilliant as the rays of the sun, and whose lotus-like countenance
has curly locks floating about it. (33) May my mind, body and soul rest in Sri Krsna, whose
face is hemmed all round by flowing hair soiled with the dust raised by the horses’ hoofs on
the battle-field and is bedecked with drops of perspiration, auc whose skin is being pierced
by my sharp arrows, though protected with a shining armour(34) May | develop love for the
friend of Prtha's son (Arjuna), who at the request of His friend immediately drove and placed
his chariot in the middle of the Pandava and the Kaurava hosts and, planting Himself there,
cut short the life of the hostile warriors by His very looks. (35) May | be blessed with devotion
to the feet of that Supreme Being who by imparting spiritual knowledge (in the form of the
Gita) dispelled the (temporary) delusion of His friend, who on seeing us (generals of the
Kaurava forces) at the van of the hostile army arrayed at a distance felt disinclined to kill his
own kith and kin because he regardedit a sin. (36) Breaking His own vow (not to take up arms
during the Mahabharata war), to fulfil and exalt my vow (of compelling Him to take up arms),

Sri Krsna jumped down from the car on which He had taken His seat and, like a lion that
pounces upon an elephant to kill him, darted towards me with a wheel of His chariot in His
hand, the earth trembling under His feet and His upper garment dropping behind Him. (37)
Hit with the piercing arrows of a desperado like me and bathed in blood, and with His armour
broken, He who rushed forth to kill me, disregarding the remonstrances of Arjuna—may that
Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of blessedness) be my asylum. (38) May | in my last moments
develop love for the Lord who, having taken upon Himself the responsibility to protect the
chariot of Vijaya (Arjuna), took the charioteer's whip in one hand and held the horses' reins
in another and looked most attractive in that charming role, witnessing which (at their last
moment) they who fell on this battle-field attained a form similar to His (or SarUpya-Mukti as
the scriptures call it). (39) Having had the signal honour of enjoying the sight of His charming
gait, graceful movements, winsome smiles and amorous glances (during the famous Rasa
dance at Vrndavana), the cowherdesses in their mad ecstasy imitated His plays (when the
Lord suddenly disappeared from their midst—vide Discourses XXXII and XXXIll of Book
Ten) and attained identity with Him (for the time being). (40) In an assembly crowded with
hosts of sages and foremost princes during the Rajastya”* sacrifice performed by Yudhisthira
Sri Krsna, who attracted the eyes of them all, had the honour of being worshipped first of
all before my very eyes. Itis He, the Soul of the Universe, who has appeared before me (at
this moment). (41) Having shaken off the foolish idea of diversity, | have realized that unborn
Lord, who though one, is severally enthroned in the heart of all embodied creatures brought
forth by Himself, even as the sun, though one, appears as many to every eye. (42)

उवाच
कृष्ण एवं भगवति प्रनोवण्दृष्टिवृत्तिभिङ्मुआत्मन्मात्पप्नपाव्रेश्यसोऽन्त:श्वम्सउण्यान्धिंइ।
सम्पद्यमानमाज्ञाय wet ब्रह्मणि निष्कले । सर्वे बभूत्रुस्ते quit वयांसीव दिनात्यये ।`४४॥
तत्र दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्देवमानववादिता: । WAY: साधवो WHT खात्पेतु: पुष्पवृष्टय: ive!
तस्य Reon सम्परेतस्य भार्गव । युधिष्ठिर: कारयित्वा मुहूर्तं दु:खितोऽभवत् we!
waa हृष्टा: कृष्णं तद्गुह्यनामभि: । ततस्ते FORM: स्वाश्रमान् प्रययु: पुन: ive!

“ Asacrifice performed by a universal monarch with co-operation and help of his tributary princes at the time of his
coronation as a mark of his undisputed sovereignty.
