Dis. 11 ] BOOK SEVEN” 705

Stor Stet inten ee eRe ttt tote sire rie tr 6 Fr fr Itoi toto tt ern nt eto inion tet ier ot ete ert

Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled “The (story of) the conquest of the three cities",
forming part of the dialogue between Emperor Yudhisthira and the sage Narada,
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SBME
CDOT ER ELE LS OD

Discourse XI
An inquiry into right conduct: *
श्रीगुक उवाच
Sri Suka began again : Having heard the narrative—celebrated (even) by assemblies
of pious souls—of Prahrada (the ruler of the Daityas), the leader of most exalted souls,

whose mind was fixed on the almighty Lord Visnu,|Yudhisthira, full of joy, further inquired (as
follows) of Narada (son of Brahma, the self-born). (1)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छामि नृणां xt ware वर्णाश्रमाचारयुतं यत् पुमान्विन्दते परम्। २ ।
भवान्प्रजापते: साक्षादात्मज: परमेष्ठिन: | सुतानां सम्मतो ब्रह्मस्तपोयोगसमाधिभि: । ३ ।

नारायणपरा fast et गुह्यं परं fag: | करुणा: साधव: द्ञान्तास्त्वद्बिधा न तथापरे । ४ ।

Yudhisthira said: O divine personage, | am anxious to hear (from you) about the eternal
Dharma (course of right conduct) prescribed for men, along with the ethical code governing
the (four) Varnas (or grades of society) and Asramas (stages in life), by following which a
human being (eventually) reaches the Supreme (either through devotion or Spiritual
enlightenment). (2) You are a (mind-born) son of no other than Brahma (the lord of created
beings), the highest deity—(nay) the most beloved of (all) his sons, O holy one, by virtue of
(your) asceticism, concentration of mind and deep meditation. (Hence he must have
revealed to you the secret of Dharma, of which he is the first and foremost exponent). (3)
(Only) kind-hearted, pious and tranquil Brahmanas like you, devoted to Lord Narayana,
know the highest (conception of) virtue, which is a (guarded) secret; not so others (the so-
called law-givers, the compilers of the various Smrtis). (4)

ING उवाच

नत्वा भगवतेऽजाय लोकानां धर्महेतवे। वक्ष्ये सनातनं धर्मं नारायणमुखाच्छुतम् । ५ ।

योऽवतीर्यात्मनोंऽशेन दाक्षायण्यां तु eda: । लोकानां स्वस्तयेऽध्यास्ते तपो बदरिकाश्रमे । ६ ।

धर्ममूलॆ fe भगवान्सर्ववेदमयो हरि: । स्मृतं च तद्विदां राजन्येन चात्मा प्रसीदति । ७ ।
Narada resumed : Bowing (my head) to gain the favour of the birthless Lord (Narayana),
the Promoter of righteousness among the people, । shall expound the eternal Law as learnt
from the lips of (the divine sage) Narayana, who, taking His descent along with His part
manifestation (the sage Nara) from Dharma (the god of piety) through (his wife) Murti

(daughter of Daksa) is, as a matter of fact, practising austerities (even to this day) in His
hermitage at Badrinatha for the good of the people. (5-6) The source of and the authority on
