528 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 22

eR ROE We RE Wy er ee ee A SCREEN CHEN KERK SCHR ETTE HH KLEE CEH HHH HH TE He

यावतार्थैन नभोवीथ्यां प्रचरति तं कालमयनमाचक्षते।६। अथ च यावन्नभोमण्डलं स ह
वत्सरमिति मानार्मान्द्यशैघ्र्यसमगतिभि: समामनन्ति। ७।

The sage clearly said ; (Even) as the course of anis etc., crawling ona potter's wheel—
whichis rotating (on its axle)—and (thus) revolving with it, is indeed different (from the course
of the wheel) as is evidenced by the fact that the ants etc., are observed in different parts
(of the wheel even while it is in motion), so the course of the sun and other planets—which
are subject to the wheel of Time, symbolized by the (various) constellations and the signs
of the zodiac, and revolve with it even as the wheel in the form of constellations revolves
round the pole-star and Mount Meru—is certainly different (from the course of the said wheel
of Time, with which they move), as is clear from the fact that the sun and other planets are
observed as conjoined with different constellations and at different signs of the zodiac (from
the one where they were seen before). (2) It is no other than the glorious (omnipotent) Lord
Narayana, the most ancient Person (the ultimate Cause of the whole universe) Himself, who
is critically inquired into by the Vedas as well as by the wise (those well-versed in the Vedas),
that for the welfare of (all) living beings splits up His body (in the form of Time, symbolized
by the year)—the theme of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda), (nay)
which is responsible for the right (timely) performance of rituals—into twelve parts (the
twelve months) and manifests (by turns), in the six seasons, spring etc., the (distinctive)
characteristics (in the form of heat and cold, showers and winds etc.), of each season, so
as to provide the Jivas with the means of reaping the fruits of their past actions. (3) Devoutly
worshipping in this world the aforesaid Lord (in the form of Indra and the other deities)
through (the different orders or grades of) rituals, (both) high and low, prescribedin the three
Vedas, and (in the form of the Supreme Person) through the elaborate system of Yoga
(courses of spiritual discipline or methods of God-Realization, e.g., Bhakti, Jnana, Yoga),
men following the path chalked out for the various Varnas (grades cf society) and Asramas
(stages in life) easily and duly attain the (desired) blessings (in the form of heavenly bliss—
inthe case of those who worship Him through rituals—or final beatitude in the case of those
who worship Him through Bhaktiyoga, Karmayoga, JAanayoga and so on). (4) Now,
entering (in the form of the sun) the wheel of Time (as symbolized by the stellar sphere)
existing in the firmament between heaven and earth, the same Lord who is the soul of all
living beings passes through twelve months, the (twelve) parts of a year, known by the
names of the (twelve) signs of the zodiac (Mesa, Vrsa and so on). The learned declare that
a month is equivalent to a couple of fortnights (one bright and the other dark, according
to the lunar calendar), a day and night (in the eye of the manes) and the period taken in
traversing two constellations and a quarter (from the point of the sun). And the fraction of
a year in which He (the sun-god) covers the sixth part (of His orbit) is called a Rtu (season). (5)
And, again, they refer to the (duration of) time in which He traverses one-half ef His
passage through the heavens as an Ayana (a half-year). (6) And, further, the learned
speak of the (length of) time in which the same sun traverses the whole extent of the sky—
bounded by the heavenly sphere on one side and the terrestrial sphere on the other—
along with these two spheres in slow, rapid and moderate marches as a Samvatsara,*
Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Anuvatsara or Vatsara. (7)

ud चन्द्रमा अर्कगभस्तिभ्य उपरिष्टाल्लक्षयोजनत उपलभ्यमानोऽर्कस्य संवत्सरभुक्तिं पक्षाभ्यां
मासभुक्तिं सपादर्क्षभ्यां दिनेनैव पक्षभुक्तिमग्रचारी द्रुततरगमनो भुङ्क्ते। ८ | अथ चापूर्यमाणाभिश्च

*For the significance of the names Sarnvatsara, Parivatsara and so on. vide footnote below Ill. xi. 14.
