Dis. 24 ] BOOK EIGHT 833

SHAE AR HCAHR EEE ELAR HEHEHE SHER HRERAREECEL eH E ht fitness hci htinint

भगवञ्छोतुमिच्छामि हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: | अवतारकथामाद्यां मायामत्स्यविडम्बनम् । १ ।
यदर्थमदधाद् रूपं une लोकजुगुप्सितम्। तम:प्रकृति दुर्मर्षं कर्मग्रस्त इवेश्वर: । २ ।
एतन्नो भगवन् wd यथावद् वक्तुमर्हसि । उत्तमर्लोकचरितं सर्वलोकसुखावहम् 3 |
The king (Pariksit) submitted : O divine sage, | (now) wish to hear (from your lips) the
Story of the (very) first descent of Sri Hari—whose exploits are marvellous (indeed)—in which
He appeared and behaved as a fish by His wonderful creative energy.(1) Be pleased to
tell us precisely the reason why, like one subject to (the wheel of) Karma, the almighty
Lord assumed the form of a fish—(so) detested in the world, because of its being
(predominantly) Tamasika by nature and (therefore so) fierce(lit., difficult to resist)—and
everything connected with that descent, O venerable sage. (For) the stories of Lord Visnu
of excellent renown are conducive to the happiness of the worlds. (2-3)
Yd उवाच
इत्युक्तो विष्णुरातेन भगवान् बादरायणि: | उवाच चरितं विष्णोर्मत्स्यरूपेण यत् कृतम् । ४ ।

Sita resumed : Requested thus by Pariksit (protege of Lord Visnu manifested in the
form of SriKrsna*)the all- knowing sage Suka (the son of Vedavyasa, nicknamed Badarayana,
so-called because he has his abode in a grove of jujube trees) recounted (as follows) the
deeds of Lord Visnu, performed by Him as manifested in the form of a fish. (4)

श्रीगुक उवाच
गोविप्रसुरसाधूनां छन्दसामपि चेश्वर: । रक्षामिच्छंस्तनूर्धत्ते धर्मस्यार्थस्य da हि । ५ ।
उच्चावचेषु भूतेषु चरन् वायुरिवेश्वर: । नोच्चावचत्वं भजते निर्गुणत्वाद्धियो गुणै: । ६ ।
आसीदतीतकल्पान्ते ब्राह्मो नैमित्तिको लय: । समुद्रोपप्नुतास्तत्र लोका भूरादयो नृप । ७ ।
कालेनागतनिद्रस्य धातु: शिशयिषघोर्बली। मुखतो नि:सृतान् वेदान् हयग्रीवोऽन्तिकेऽहरत् । ८ ।

Wet तद् दानवेन्द्रस्य हयग्रीवस्य चेष्टितम्। दधार ङाफरीरूपं भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: । ९ ।

Sri Suka resumed : The almighty Lord actually assumes (various) forms (only) when
seeking the protection of cows, the Brahmanas, the gods and the righteous and the Vedas
too, as well as of righteousness and whatever (else) is worth seeking (in the world).(5)
(Though) functioning in (all) creatures, high and low, (as their Inner Controller), the Lord, like
the air, does not acquire a high or low status occasioned by the modes of Prakrti, because
of His being devoid of the (three) Gunas. (6) At the end of the previous Kalpa (covering a day
of Brahma or a thousand revolutions of the four Yugas) there came about an occasional
dissolution of the universe consequent on Brahmas retiring to bed (at the end of the day's
work). At that time (all) the (three) worlds including the earth were washed away by the ocean,
Q protector of men ! (7) The powerful (demon) Hayagriva (so-called because of his having
the head of a horse), who was near by, stole away (by dint of Yoga or concentration of mind)
the Vedas, which (while being unconsciously repeated by him) had (automatically) escaped
(as usual) from the mouths of Brahma (the creator), who was inclined to go to bed, overcome
as he was by sleep under the influence of time (the close of the day). (8) Perceiving that action
of Hayagriva, the Danava chief, the almighty Lord Sri Hari assumed the form of a fish. (9)

तत्र राजऋषि: कश्चिन्नाम्ना सत्यव्रतो महान्। नारायणपरोऽतप्यत् तप: A alee: 1201
योऽसावस्मिन् महाकल्ये तनय: स विवस्वत: । श्राद्धदेव इति ख्यातो मनुत्वे हरिणार्पित: ।११॥
एकदा कृतमालायां कुर्वतो जलतर्पणम्।तस्याञ्जल्युदके काचिच्छफर्येकाभ्यपद्यत 1221

* Vide I. XU, 714

