278 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 42

SREP SEE ESE ERE ASRS मारा REEERE ELE SS ERS KSEE 9 94#2% 2७८ ५4.॥ ५७५६ ६.५२42 % 28

सोऽपि वव्रेऽचलां भक्तिं तस्मिन्नेवाखिलात्मनि । तद्भक्तेषु च सौहार्दं भूतेषु च दयां पराम्। ५१।

gia wet at दत्त्वा श्रियं चान्वयवर्धिनीम् । बलमायुर्यश: कान्तिं निर्जगाम सहाग्रज:। ५२।

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे Wit पुरप्रवेशो नाम एकचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:। ४१॥

Next the two Brothers went to the house of the florist Sudama. Seeing Them he
respectfully rose and bowed (to Them) with his head placed on the ground. (43) Fetching
a seat as well as water to wash Their feet with, he offered worship to Them along
with Their followers with water to wash Their hands with and other articles of worship
including garlands, betel-leaves seasoned with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings,
and sandal-paste. (44) He submitted, “Thanks to Your advent, O Lord, fruitful is our
birth and hallowed is our race (today)! Indeed the manes, the gods and the Rsis (too)
are pleased with me (for the same reason). (45) The ultimate Cause of the whole
universe, You iwo, | understand, have appeared on this earth by Your own will for
the protection as well as for the growth of the world. (46) Even though You love him
(alone) who worships You, Your eye is never discriminating inasmuch as You are
the disinterested friends,(nay,) the (very) Self of the universe and the same to all created
beings. (47) As such be pleased to command me (Your servant) both of You what
service can | render to You. Indeed this constitutes a great boon to a man that he
is entrusted by You with some service.” (48) Saying so and divining the wishes of
the Lord, O king of kings, Sudama, whose mind was full of joy, presented (to the
two Brothers) garlands made of excellent flowers of superb fragrance. (49) Charmingly
adorned with them along with Their followers and full of delight, Sri Krsna and Balarama,
the Bestowers of boons, conferred boons on the florist, who stood bent low (with
reverence) and sought Their protection. (50) He too asked for (the gift of) unflinching
devotion to Sri Krsna alone, the Self of all, as well as friendship with His devotees
and supreme (disinterested) compassion for (all) created beings. (51) Having thus
conferred his desired boon as well as a fortune that would grow in the hands of his
posterity, (physical) strength, longevity, glory and splendour, the Lord departed (from
that place) along with Balarama (His elder Brother). (52)
Thus ends the forty-first discourse entitled “Entry (of Sri Krsna and Balarama) into Mathura’,

in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

Tce

अथ द्विचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLII

A description of the amphitheatre for wrestlers (set up by Karnsa)
ae उवाच
विलोक्य gent gadi वराननां wre यान्तीं प्रहसन् रसप्रद:। १ ।
का त्वं वरोर्वेतदु हानुलेपनं कस्याङ्गने वा कथयस्व साधु न:]
देह्यावयोरङ्गविलेपमुत्तमं श्रेयस्ततस्ते नचिराद् भविष्यति। २ ।
