Dis. 60 ] BOOK TEN 371

ROO Ne enor ronan ote rae es: SAIC III nro onto II eri toi ion gain inci

decking Him with garlands (in the hot weather), dressing His hair, arranging His bed, bathing
Him and serving Him with refreshments etc. (45)

Thus ends the fifty-ninth discourse entitled "The Lord snatches away
(by force) a Parijata tree (from indra’s paradise) and
makes short work of Naraka," in the latter half of
Book Ten of the great and glorious
. Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

१७०8 ttt
CDOT EEE OID

अथ षष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LX

A dialogue between Sri Krsna and Rukmini

श्रीरुक उवाच
aff सुखमासीनं स्वतल्पस्थं जगद्गुरुम् of पर्यचरद् Se व्यजनेन सखीजनै: । १ ।
यस्त्वेतल्लीलया fad सृजत्यत्त्यवतीश्वर: । स हि ae: स्वसेतूनां गोपीथाय agg: । २ |

तस्मिन्नन्तर्गृहे भ्राजन्भुक्तादामविलम्बिना । विराजिते वितानेन दीपैर्मणिमयैरपि । ३ ।

मल्लिकादामभि: पुष्पैर्दिरफकुलनादितै: । जालसन्ध्रप्रविष्टैश्च गोभिश्चन्द्रमसोऽमलै: । ४ |

पय-:फेननिभे शुभ्रे we कशिपूत्तमे । उपतस्थे qed जगतामीश्वरं पतिम्। ६ |

वालव्यजनमादाच owas सखीकरात्।तेन वीजयती देवी उपासाञ्जक्र ईश्वरम् । ७ ।
सोपाच्युतं क्वणयती मणिनूपुराभ्यां रजऽङ्गुलायवलग्रव्यजनाग्रहस्तम्या।

क्काह्रुङ्कृवुग्ङ्कुपन्धांथासाप्ननघघृत्तयाचपरार्घ्यकाज्यान्धिं।
at रूपिणीं श्रियमनन्यगति निरीक्ष्य या लीलया धृतत्तनोरनुरूपरूपा ।

प्रीत: स्मयन्नलककुण्डलनिष्ककण्ठवक्त्रल्लसत्सितसुधां हरिराबभाषे । ९ ।

Sri Suka began again : On a certain night Rukmini (the daughter of king Bhismaka),
accompanied by her female companions, was serving with a fan her (divine) Spouse (Lord
Sri Krsna), the Father and Illuminator of the world, who was comfortably seated on her own
bed. (1) The same birthless Lord who creates, sustains and destroys the universe by way of
sport was born in the race of Yadu for maintaining the (moral} standards set up by Himself. (2)
Rukmini waited upon her Spouse, the suzerain Lord of (all) the ‘worlds, (who was)
comfortably seated on a superb cushion, white as the foam of milk, mounted on a couch, O
king ! within that (well-known) inner apartment (of Rukmini's palace)—whose beauty was
heightened by a canopy fringed with brilliant pearl-strings hanging from it, by gems serving
as lights, by flowers and garlands of jasmines resonant with the humming of black bees, and
by silvery rays of the moon that had penetrated into it through eye-holes of latticed windows—
(nay,) which was fanned by breezes blowing through the garden (attached to it} and laden
with the fragrance of Parijata trees (figuring in it), and scented with fumes rising from burning
aloe-wood and escaping through the (aforementioned) eye-holes. (3—6) Taking from the
