622 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis..16
BERKEL क दि क ह कद्यीतविहौ क ह SHH कीं कज्क्तै ककर्या ककक EET ERE ETL CEMA AAO ळ डत्त कौ EEL OUR ERHE
relations—all these, O ruler of the Sdrasena territory, are sources of grief, infatuation, fear
and affliction. (Nay,) they are (of a momentary nature) like an imaginary city seen in the sky
and are of the nature of (similar in character to) a dream, illusion, and fancy. (21—23) They
are (merely) conceptual in that they are perceived without reality and disappear (the very
next momen). (If it is urged that the acquisitions mentioned above are rewards of
meritorious acts done in a previous life and not merely conceptual), the various actions (too)
proceed from the mind of a man thinking of such material possessions under the force of
tendencies of action (acquired in former existences). (24) As a matter of fact, this body
(alone)—consisting of the gross elements, the senses of perception and the organs of
action—has been spoken of (by the knowers of truth) as causing afflictions and agonies of
various kinds to the embodied soul who regards it as his own self. (25) Therefore,
investigating with a composed mind the true nature of the Self, give up faith in the abiding
reality of the objective world (implying duality) and resort to quietism. (26)

ARG उवाच
wat मन्त्रोपनिषदं प्रतीच्छ प्रयतो मम । यां धारयन् सप्तरात्राद् द्रष्टा सङ्कुर्षणं प्रभुम् 1201
नरेन्द्र खे २ oN om. f त टिं ।
सद्यस्तदीयमतुलानधिकं महित्वं प्रापुर्भवानपि परं नचिरादुपैति ici
Narada said : Having been purified (through a bath and other purificatory rites after
disposing of the dead body), receive from me the following sacred text (quoted in xvi. 18—25)
as an abode of the highest blessing. By repeating and fixing your thought on it you will be
able to behold Lord Sankarsana (only) after seven nights. (27) By resorting to the soles of
His feet, O king of kings, devotees belonging to the (remotest) past—Lord Siva (the
Destroyer of the universe) and others—got rid of the illusion of this world (implying duality)

and forthwith attained to (oneness with) His unsurpassed, nay, unequalled greatness, and
you too will attain before long the same supreme result. (28)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled “Citraketu consoled’,
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

Rat Pula hh
PITRE Sees

अथ षोडशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XVI
Citraketu realizes (his oneness with) the Supreme Spirit
7
अथ देवऋषी राजन् सम्परेतं नृपात्मजम्।दर्शयित्वेति होवाच ज्ञातीनामनुशोचताम्। १ ।

. Sri Suka began again : After that, O Pariksit, Narada (the celestial sage) showed (by
his Yogic power) to the sorrowing kinsmen (the ghost of) the departed prince (in an aerial
body with which the soul is clothed when departing from the physical body and travelling to
the other world), and spoke thus as the tradition goes. (1)

ARG उवाच

जीवात्मन् पश्य भद्रं ते मातरं पितरं च ते । सुहृदो बान्धवास्तप्ता: शुचा त्वत्कृतया भृशम् । २ ।
