Dis. 12 } BOOK SEVEN 713

QRH AEE AEE EKA EA EHR AE EEEHE LET HERE कौ छत्त AEA WTEHERNTAEHEA EH EHHRAAH HHA ee

आत्मन्यग्नीन् समारोप्य संन्यस्याहंममात्मताम्। कारणेषु न्यसेत् सम्यक संघातं तु यथार्हत: । २४॥
खे खानि वायो नि:श्चासांस्तेजस्यूष्माणमात्मवान्। अप्स्वसृक्र्लेष्मपूयानि क्षितौ होषं यथोद्भवम् । २५॥
am सधक्तव्यामिन्रे fired करावपि । पदानि गत्या वयसि रत्योपस्थं प्रजापतो 126!
मृत्यो un विसर्गं च यथास्थानं विनिर्दिशोत्। fea श्रोत्रं सनादेन स्पर्शमध्यात्मनि त्वचम् । २७॥
warn चक्षुषा राजन् ज्योतिष्यभिनिवेशयेत्। अप्सु प्रचेतसा जिह्वां घ्रेयैर्घराणं क्षितौ न्यसेत् । २८।
मनो मनोरथैश्चन्रे ake बोध्यै: wat परे। कर्माण्यध्यात्मना रुद्रे यदहंममताक्रिया |
सत्त्वेन fad aan गुणैर्वैकारिकं परे 1281
अप्सु क्षितिमपो ज्योतिष्यदो वायौ नभस्यमुम्। कूटस्थे तच्च महति तदव्यक्तेऽक्षरे च तत् । ३०॥
इत्यक्षरतयाऽऽत्मानं चिन्मात्रमवरोषितम् | ज्ञात्वाद्वयोऽथ fame दग्धयोनिरिवानल: ।३१॥
When incapable through ailments or old age of performing his (religious) duties and even
of pursuing the knowledge of the Spirit, he should resort to fasting etc.* (23) Withdrawing
the sacred fires into himself and giving up the feeling of identification with the body as well
as the feeling that the body etc., are 'mine’, he should (mentally) merge his psychopnysical
organism in its causes, assigning each constituent to its proper place (as explained in the
following verses). (24) A wise man should merge the apertures of his body (viz., the two eyes,
the two ears, the two nostrils, the mouth and the organs of urination and defecation) in ether,
the (five) vital airs in the (cosmic) air, the heat (of his body) in (the element of ) fire; the blood,
phlegm and pus (etc.) into water and the rest (viz., solid matter such as bones, flesh and so
on) in earth, everything being consigned to its origin. (25) (Again,) he should merge his (organ
of) speech along with the function of speaking in Agni (the god of fire), the two hands as well
as the function of grasping and releasing things in Indra, the feet along with (the function of)
locomotion in Lord Visnu (conceived in the form of the Time-Spirit), the faculty of procreation
along with sexual enjoyment in Prajapati (the god presiding over procreation) andthe organ
of defecation as well as the act of voiding excrements in Mrtyu (the god of death), directing
each organ and its function to its proper place (the deity presiding over it). (Likewise) he
should merge the sense of hearing along with sound (the object of hearing) in the (deities
presiding over) the quarters, the tactile sense as well as touch in the wind-god and the
(various) colours along with the faculty of vision in the sun-god (the source of light), O
Yudhisthira. He should (further) merge the palate along with (the different) tastes (towards
which the mind feels excessively drawn) in (the deity presiding over) water, the olfactory
sense along with the various smells (the objects of the olfactory sense) into (the goddess
presiding over) the earth, Manas (the mind) along with the (various) projects (indulged in by
the mind) in the moon-god, Buddhi (understanding) along with the objects capable of being
understood in Brahma (the highest and the earliest seer,) (his) actions along with self-
consciousness in Rudra, from whom proceeds (all) action prompted by egotism and self-
interest, Citta (reason) along with Sattva (consciousness) in Lord Vasudeva (the deity
presiding over Citta) and the Jiva (who is tainted with the morbid feeling that | am the enjoyer
and so on) along with the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti, which are responsible for the
aforesaid morbid feeling) in the transcendent Brahma (the Absolute). (26—29) (Then) he

* Itis laid down in Discourse XIII that even after completing the maximum period of twelve'years an anchorite should
continue to practise austerilies in the woods if he is still able-bodied and fit to perform his religlous duties, or that he should
enter the fourth stage and lead the life of a recluse (Sarhnyasi) if he is no longer fit for austerities but is intellectually fit and
mentally alert enough to pursue the knowledge of the Spirit. When, however, he finds himself both physically and mentally
unfit, he is advised to adopt the course suggested in this and the following verses.

[564] B. M. 25—
