560 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

RARE डौ दौ दौ वित् छ SHE दौ दौ क HEHE EEN REHEREELEEREEEEEELEREECEREELEERE HOHE ती घौ उ REHASH

blinding gloom of transmigration again. (35) Having got rid of the bondage of mudane
existence—so well-known (in the shape of ties of attachment toson, wife, house and
so on), and resulting from ignorance (manifested in the form of self-identification with
the body etc.), and from the craving for the gratification of the senses and activity (in
the shape of endeavour to procure such gratification)—benevolent to all living beings,
free from craving for the pleasures of sense, friendly and compassionate (to all) and
with (my) mind fully controlled, | shall redeem myself, completely dominated as | am
by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in the shape of woman, by whom my wretched
self has indeed been fully toyed with even as an animal kept for pleasure. (36-37)
Giving up the sense of `[` and ’mine’ in relation severally to the body and whatever
is connected with it, and with my thought fixed on the real substance (the Spirit), |
shall devote my mind to the almighty Lord when it has been purified by chanting His
names and praises and other ways of Devotion (such as hearing His praises and
remembering Him)? (38)
श्रीगुक उवाच
इति जातसुनिर्वेद: क्षणसङ्गखेन साधुषु | गङ्गाद्वारमुपेयाय मुक्तसर्वानुबन्धन: । ३९1
स तस्मिन् देवसदन आसीनो योगमाश्रित: । प्रत्याहतेन्द्रियग्रामो युयोज मन आत्मनि vol
at गुणेभ्य आत्मानं वियुज्यात्मसमाधिना । युयुजे भगवद्धाम्नि ब्रह्मण्यनुभवात्मनि ।४१।
यर्ह्यपारतधीस्तस्मिन्नद्राक्षीत्पुरुषान् पुर: | उपलभ्योपलब्धान् प्राग्ववन्दे शिरसा द्विज: ।४२॥
faa कलेवरं तीर्थे गङ्गायां दर्शनादनु । सद्य: wed जगृहे भगवत्पार्श्ववर्तिनाम् ४३1
Sri Suka began again : Having thus conceived a thorough aversion to the pleasures
of sense, thanks to a moment's association with the pious servants of Lord Visnu, and
throwing off all fetters (in the shape of affection for his mistress and children), Ajamila
retired to Gangadwara (the sacred spot where the holy river Ganga descends into the
plains, and which is now known by the name of Hariksetra or Haridwara). (39) Settling
down at that holy place (an eternal abode of the Lord) and betaking himself to the path
of Yoga, he withdrew all his senses (from their objects) and fixed his mind on the
supreme self. (40) Then, dissociating the mind from the body and senses etc., through
concentration of the same, he devoted it to the essence of the Lord, (known by the name
of) Brahma, that is all consciousness. (41) When his mind was (thus) irrevocably fixed
on the aforesaid Brahma, the Brahmana beheld in front of him the same (angelic)
persons and, recognizing them, as seen before, bowed his head to them. (42) Having
quitted his (earthly) body at that sacred place (Gangadwara) on the bank of the (holy)
Ganga (immediately) after their sight, he forthwith assumed a (divine) body similar
to the form of the Lord's attendants (dwelling by His side). (48) Mounting an aerial
‘car made of gold, the Brahmana (Ajamila) ascended with those servants of Lord
Visnu (the Supreme Person) through the heavens to the (divine) realm (known by the
name of Vaikuntha), where resides the Spouse of Sri (the goddess of beauty and
prosperity). (44)

wa स विष्लावितसर्वधर्मा cen: ofa: पतितो गर्ह्यकर्मणा ।
निपात्यमानो fra हतव्रत: wat विमुक्तो भगवन्नाम गृह्णन्।४५॥।
aM: परं कर्मनिबन्धकृन्तने मुमुक्षतां तीर्थपदानुकीर्तनात्।
न यत्पुन: कर्मसु as मनो रजस्तमोभ्यां aie ततोऽन्यथा ive
