432 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30

आजाजा कच GREE ROMO GEM REED NETE ताजा ना जा आ कज् TEA RO BEBE Re MEME ज RW ती ता ता TRE कक EM TM HGR ती He वी जा तं RE We वी धी HR

all-knowing Lord, enter the heart of such devotees as if in an ever new aspect. This

(manifestation of Mine in the heart) is (the same as the realization of) Brahma as (is evident

from the fact that) those who attain to Me never given way to infatuation, grief or joy. (20)
एवं ब्रुवाणं पुरुषार्थभाजनं जनार्दनं प्राञ्ञलय: प्रचेतस: |
तद्दर्शनध्वस्ततमोरजोमला गिरागृणन् गद्गदया सुहृत्तमम् ।२१॥

Maitreya continued: Even as Lord Visnu (He whois supplicated by men), the Bestower
of (all) the objects of human pursuit and the greatest friend (ofall), spoke thus, the Pracetas,
who had been rid of all impurities in the shape of Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance) by
His (very) sight, addressed Him (as follows) with joined palms in a voice choked with
emotion. (21)

—

नमो aa: क्वेशविनाहानाय निरूपितोदारगुणाह्वयाय ।

Awa शान्ताय नम: «arg मनस्यपार्थं बिलसद्द्वयाय ।

नमो जगत्स्थानलयोदयेषु गृहीतमाबागुणविग्रहाय 123 |
नमो विशुद्धसत्त्वाय हरये गस्मध्रम।वामुटवप्यबृत्र्ष्णण्यप्रभवमवसात्वताम्|२४।
नम: कमलनाभाय नम: कमलमालिने aa: कमलपादाय ATA कमलेक्षण । २५॥
नम कमलकिञ्जल्कपिशाङ्खामलवाससे | सर्वभूतनिवासाय नमोयुऽङ्क्ष्महि साक्षिणे । २६॥
ea भगवता त्वेतदशोषक्लेशसंक्षवम्। आविष्कृतं न क्लिष्टानां किमन्यदनुकम्पितम् 1201
एतावत्त्वं fe विभुभिर्भाव्यं दीनेषु वत्सलै: । चदनुस्मर्यतॆ काले स्वबुद्ध्याभद्ररन्धन 126 |
येनोपजान्तिर्भूतानां क्षल्लकप्तंम्पपी’ताम्।अन्तर्निताऽन्तह्दय कम्पान्ना ae arena: ।२९॥

at वृणीमहेऽथापि नाथ त्वत्परत: परात्। न ह्यन्तस्त्वट्बिभूतीनां सोऽनन्त इति गीयसे 1321

तुलयाम waa न स्वर्गं नापुनर्भवम्। भगवत्सङ्घिसङ्घस्य मर्त्यनां किमुताशिघ: ।३४॥
यत्रेड्यन्ते कथा मृष्टास्तृष्णाया: प्रशमा aa: । ae यत्र भूतेषु नोद्वेगो बत्र कश्चन । ३५
यत्र नारायण: साक्षाद्भगवान्न्यासिनां wha: | संस्तूयते सत्कथासु मुक्तसङ्गे: पुन: GA ।३६॥
तेषां विचरतां पद्भ्यां तीर्थानां पावनेच्छया । भीतस्य किं न रोचेत तावकानां समागम: 13191

The Pracetas said: Hail, hail to You, who relieve Your devotees of (all) afflictions, whose
excellent virtues and names have been declared(by the Vedas) as the source ofall blessings
and who surpass in quickness both mind and speech! Hail again to You, the way of whose
approach lies beyond the range of all the senses ! (22) Hail to You who are unconditioned
and serene by virtue of Your being (ever) established in Your essential nature, and in whom
duality falsely appears due to (the existence of) the mind ! Hail to You, who for the purposes
of creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe assume various forms (the forms
of Brahma. Visnu and Siva) through the attributes (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) of Maya ! (23)
Hail to You, known by the name of Sri Hari and consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and
Tamas, whose realization puts an end to (the cycle of) transmigration ! Hail to SriKrsna, son
of Vasudeva, the Lord of (all) devotees ! (24) Obeisance to You who have a lotus sprung from
