Dis. 6] ~ BOOK ONE 21

eRe वी तं ती ती Me By He Br REY ज सो शां को कीं त्ती जरॆ कौ हौ की BT Ree RR ERR a a Be BRE Br BOR Rit int द्त्रो BRR totter ac ay

period your thought has been irrevocably fixed on Me. Therefore, casting off this
reprehensible (material) body you will attain to the position of my own attendant. (24) The
thought you have thus fixed on Me shail never cease. And by My grace you will continue to
remember Me even when the whole creation has perished." (25) Having said this much, that
great invisible Being, the Ruler of alland omnipresent as ether, stopped short. Realizing His
unique grace | for my part bowed my head to Him, the greatest of the great. (26) Shaking
` off all shyness | now began to repeat the mysterious and auspicious names and fixed my
thoughts on the exploits of the infinite Lord. Rid of all cravings, free from vanity and jealousy
and contented at heart, । roamed about on the globe awaiting my end. (27)
wa कृष्णमतेर्ब्रह्मन्नसक्तस्यामलात्मन: | काल: प्रादुरभूत्काले तडित्सौदामनी यथा । २८।
प्रयुज्यमाने मयि at Bei भागवतीं तनुम्। आरब्धकर्मनिर्वाणो न्यपतत् पाञ्चभौतिक: । २९॥
कल्पान्त इदमादाय हायानेऽम्भस्युदन्वत: | शिशायिषोरनुप्राणं विविहोऽन्तरहं विभो: 1301
सहस्रयुगपर्यन्ते उत्थायेदे सिसृक्षत: | मरीचिमिश्रा ऋषय: प्राणेभ्योऽहं च जज्ञिरे । ३१।
अन्तर्बहिश्च लोकांस्त्रीन् पर्येम्यस्कन्दितव्रत: | अनुग्रहान्महाविष्णोरविघातगति:र क्वचित् । ३२॥
देवदत्तामिमाँ वीणां स्वरब्रह्मविभूषिताम्।मूर्च्छयित्वा हरिकथां गायमानश्चराम्यहम् । 33 |
प्रगायत: स्ववीर्याणि तीर्थपाद: fraser: | आहूत ga a aft aid याति चेतसि ।३४॥
एतद्ध्यातुरचित्तानां मात्रास्पर्शोचछया मुहु: | भवसिन्धुम्लबो दृष्टो हरिचर्यानुवर्णनम् । ३५॥
यमादिभिर्योगपथै: कामलोभहतो मुहु: | मुकुन्दसेवया यद्वत्तथाऽऽत्माद्धा न जाम्यति । ३६॥
wa तदिदमाख्यातं यत्पृष्टोऽहं त्वयानघ । जन्मकर्मरहस्यं मे भवतश्चात्मतोषणम् । ३७|
To me, who had my thoughts fixed on Sri Krsna, who was free from attachment and
whose heart was thus purified, death came at the appointed hour like a flash of lightning, O
holy sage. (28) When | was about to be translated to the immaterial form of an attendant of
the Lord, my material body fell, the Prarabdha that had been responsible for it having been
reaped. (29) At the end of the preceding Kalpa, when Lord Narayana slept on the waters
of the universal Deluge, having reabsorbed the whole creation into Himself, and when
Brahma was going to enter His body and sleep there, ! too (my subtle body) entered His body
with the ingoing breath. (30) At the expiry of one thousand revolutions of the four Yugas when
Brahma (the Creator) rose and wished to bring forth this creation again, Marici and the other
sages as well as myself were evolved out of his senses. (31) With my vow of constant
remembrance of God continuing uninterrupted, | move about inside as well as outside the
three worlds; and by the grace of Lord Mahavisnu (Bhagavan Narayana, the Primal Person)
my passage is nowhere obstructed. (32) Playing upon (to the accompaniment of ) this lute,
bestowed upon me by the Lord Himself and bringing out the seven primary notes of the
gamut that represent Brahma inthe form of sound, | go about singing the story of Sri Hari.(33)
As | thus sing of His exploits, the Lord of delightful renown, whose feet represent all sacred
places (being the origin of them all), soon reveals Himself in my heart as if summoned by
me. (34) Narration of the Lord's doings has been found to be a veritable raft to cross the
ocean of mundane existence for those whose mind is incessantly tormented by the craving
for sense- enjoyment. (35) A heart smitten with lust and greed every moment does not attain
tranquillity so surely by recourse to the various practices of Yoga, such as self-control and
$0 on,as through the worship of (devotion to) Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of Liberation).(36)
O sinless one, | have thus told you all that you asked me, viz., the secret of my own birth and
doings (spiritual endeavours) and the means of satisfying your soul. (37)
