Dis. 25] BOOK FOUR 407

Set hee re A Hee EKER OT a Ee A EES He A On ee Ha EH HH HAH AMHR
rR

पञ्चशीर्षाहिना गुप्तां प्रतीहारेण ada: अन्वेषमाणामृषभमप्रौढां कामरूपिणीम् 221
सुनासां सुदतीं बालां सुकपोलां वराननाम्। समविन्यस्तकर्णाभ्यां बिभ्रतीं कुण्डलश्रियम् 1221
स्तनौ व्यञ्जितकेशोरौ wit निरन्तरौ । वस्त्रान्तेन निगूहन्तीं व्रीडया गजगामिनीम् । २४॥

In that garden he beheld a most charming damsel—who had arrived (there) by chance—
coming with ten attendants, each of whom was the spouse of a hundred wives. (20) She was
guarded on all sides by a five-hooded serpent, that was a bodyguard to her. Sixteen years
of age and capable of assuming any form at will, she was out in quest of a husband. (21) The
girl had a shapely nose, beautiful teeth; lovely cheeks and a charming countenance, and
bore in her symmetrical ears the splendour of (brilliant) ear-rings. (22) Clad in a tawny skirt
and adorned with a girdle of gold, that lady with well-formed hips and swarthy of complexion
looked like a goddess as she walked with her feet making a tinkling sound by their
anklets.(23) Moving with the (stately) gait of an elephant, she covered (every now and then)
with the end of her garment out of modesty herclose-knit, symmetrical andspherical breasts,
which bespoke the advent of youth. (24)

तामाह ललितं वीर: सव्रीडस्मितशोभनाम्। स्निग्धेनापाङ्गपुङ्खेन we: प्रेमोद्भ्रमद्भ्रुवा 124!
का त्वं कञ्जपलाशाक्षि कस्यासीह Ha: सति । इमामुप पुरीं site किं चिकीर्षसि ara मे । २६॥
क एतेऽनुपथा चे त एकादश महाभटा: | एता वा ललना: सुभ्रु कोऽयं तेऽहि: पुर:सर: ।२७॥
त्वं ह्रीर्भवान्यस्यथ वाग् रमा ofa विचिन्वती किं मुनिवद्रहो at
त्वदङ्ध्रिकामाप्तसमस्तकामं क्र पद्मकोशा: पतित: कराग्रात् IRC
अर्हस्यलङ्कर्तुमदभ्रकर्मणा लोकं फं TT RI
त्वयोपसृष्टो भगवान्मनोभव: प्रबाधतेऽथानुगृहाण WAT । ३०॥
saa मे दर्शय amar यद्व्रीडया नाभिमुखं शुचिस्मिते 132!

Pierced by (the arrow of) her affectionate sidelong glances, with the outer corner of her
eyes serving as its shaft and her eyebrows, dancing for love, as the bow, the gallant youth
(Purafjana) spoke in a winning tone to the girl, who looked (all the more) charming with her
bashful smiles :—({25) "Who are you, O pretty damsel with eyes resembling the petals of a
lotus? Whose daughter are you and whence are youhere, O noble girl ? Tell me, O timid one,
what you intend to do in the outskirts of this city. (26) Who are these ten attendants of yours,
led by that great warrior, who makes the eleventh ? Again, who are these young women, O
beautiful lady; and what about this serpent going before you ? (27) Are youHri (the goddess
presiding over the virtue of bashfulness) or Parvati (the divine Consort of Lord Siva) or Vak
(the goddess presiding over speech) or Rama (Goddess Laksmi) living in seclusion like a
hermitess in this forest in search of your lord, who has (I am sure) realized all his ambitions
by merely craving for your feet ? (If you are none else than Goddess Rama) where has the
lotus bud (Your invariable companion and distinguishing mark) dropped from the tips of your

fingers ? (28) (No,) you are none of these (aforesaid), O damsel with well-formed thighs,
since you touch the ground (with your feet). (Therefore), be pleased to grace this city with
