Dis. 14 ] BOOK THREE 197
BEREESPRERAARAEE CE RE HRER CHALE ES Ce eT EEN TORENT ATT EAE ATH ERERERE KHER EERE AnEERE
ERIE EA HH BR eB He BR He Re Ret Rr

conquer. (19) We cannot get absolutely square with you, O queen of the house, in a whole
lifetime, nay, not even in lives to come, nor can others who have a bias.for virtues. (20)
Nonetheless | shall do my best to grant this desire of yours for offspring. But please wait for
an hour or so, in order that the world may not reproach me. (21) The present is a most
ominous hour, favourable to frightful creatures (the demons etc.) and fearful to look at. At
this hour the ghosts and spirits, forming the retinue of Sri Rudra (the Ruler of the spirits),
move about. (22) At this juncture of day and night, O virtuous lady, Lord Rudra, the protector
of all beings, goes about on the back of His (favourite) bull (Nandi), accompanied by His
entourage of ghosts. (23) With His glittering mass of matted hair thrown into disorder and
soiled on account of the dust raised by whirlwinds sweeping the cremation grounds, and His
silver-white body covered with a coat of ashes, Lord Sankara, your sister's husband*, is
watching all with His three eyes (in the form of the sun, the moon and the fire). (24) (Really
Speaking, however,) no one in this world is akin or alien to Him, and no one is highly
esteemed or most despised in His eyes. Yet the pity of it is that we for our part covet as a
reward for our religious observances that very Maya (supernatural power and prosperity)
which He has enjoyed and spurned. (25) Those wise men who are keen to pierce the veil.
of ignorance recount His spotless doings. Although there is none equal to Him, much less
greater, and He is the goal of the virtuous, yet He conducts Himself in the manner of fiends
(moving about all naked, besmeared with ashes and adorned with a wreath of skulls and so
On). (26) Those unfortunate people alone who adorn their person—which (really speaking)
is the food of dogs—with wearing apparel, garlands of flowers, omaments and pigments,
treating it as their very self, laugh at the conduct of Lord Siva—who ever delights in His own
Self—ignorant of His purpose (in leading this sort of life, which is to teach the world how to
develop indifference to the world as well as to one's own body). (27) Even Brahma and the
other gods (to say nothing of us) respect the bounds set by Him. Nay, He alone is the cause
of this universe, Maya being His handmaid ! How strange that He should conduct Himself
in the manner of fiends ! Inscrutable indeed are the doings of the almighty Lord. (28)
मैत्रेय उवाच

सैवं संविदिते भरतत्रा मन्मथोन्मथितेन्द्रिया । जग्राह वासो ब्रह्मर्षेर्वृषलीव गतत्रपा । २९
स विदित्वाथ भार्यायास्तं निर्बन्धं विकर्मणि । नत्वा दिष्टाय रहसि तयाथोपविवेश ह । ३०॥
अथोपस्पृश्य सलिलं प्राणानायम्य वाग्यत: | ध्यायञ्जजाप विरजं wer ज्योति: सनातनम् । ३१॥
दितिस्तु व्रीडिता तेन कर्मावद्येन भारत । उपसङ्घम्य विप्रर्षिमधोमुख्यभ्यभाषत 1321

Maitreya continued : In spite of her husband's remonstrances Diti, whose mind had
been completely shaken by love, seized the holy Brahmana by his garment, casting all
modesty to the winds like a common woman. (29) When he saw his wife's unusual insistence
on that prohibited act, KaSyapa bowed to Providence and then sought seclusion with her. (30)
Thereafter he bathed in water, controlled his breath and speech and began to mutter the holy
syllable OM, fixing his thought on its meaning, the immutable, self-effulgent eternal
Brahma. (31) Diti too felt ashamed on account of the sin that attached to her conduct, O
Vidura (a descendant of Bharata). She, therefore, approached the holy Brahmana and, with
her face cast down, spoke (to him as follows). (32)

दितिरुवाच
मा .मे गर्भमिमं sea, भूतानामृषभो वधीत्। रुद्र: पतिर्हि भूतानां यस्याकरवमंहसम् 133

* Sati (Lord 8४३`ऽ Spouse) was a real sister of Diti (both being daughters of Daksa).
