466 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

SAA LAA AOTEAROA ज्जीजो SEAHEC EAH AACE EKEECEREET HAAR EEE AH EAHA eee eee ee

all alone to drink water. (2) While it was yet avidly drinking water, there arose a loud, deep
and hoarse sound—striking terror into the heart of all—ofa lion roaring not very far from that
place. (3) Hearing the sound, that deer, which was shy byits very nature and (already) looked
with bewildered eyes, felt all the more perturbed at heart, overcome as it was with the fear
of the lion, and precipitately leapt across the stream, its eyes swimming and its thirst not yet
quenched. (4)
तस्या उत्पतन्त्या अन्तर्वत्या उरुभयावगलितो योनिनिर्गतो गर्भ: स्रोतसि निपपात।५।
तत्प्रसवोत्सर्पणभयखेदातुरा स्वगंणेन वियुज्यमाना कस्याञ्चिददर्यां कृष्णसारसती निपपाताथ च ममार । ६ ।
Even as the déer, which was big with young, took the leap the foetus, that had been
dislodged through excessive fear, came out of the vagina andfellinto the stream. (5) Afflicted
with exhaustion caused by the premature delivery and the (unusually long) leap (taken by
it) as well as with fear (of the lion), and (further) strayed from its troop, the female deer
dropped down in some cavern and died. (6)
मृतमातरमित्याश्रमपदमनयत्। ७। तस्य ह वा एणकुणक उच्चैरेतस्मिन् कृतनिजाभिमानस्याहरहस्तत्पोषण-
पालनलालनप्रीणनानुध्यानेनात्मनियमा: सहयमा: पुरुषपरिचर्यादय एकॆकश: कतिपयेनाहर्गणेन वियुज्यमाना:
किलसर्व एवोदवसन्।८ । अहो बतायं हरिणकुणक: कृपणईंश्वररथचरणपरिभ्रमणरयेण स्वगणसुहृद्बन्धुभ्य:
परिवर्जित: शरणं च मोपसादितो मामेव मातापितरौ भ्रातृज्ञातीन् यौधिकांश्चैवोपेयाय नान्यं कञ्चन ae
मय्यतिविस्रब्धश्चात एवं मया मत्परायणस्य पोषणपालनप्रीणनलालनमनसूयुनानुष्ठेयँ शरण्योपेक्षा
दोषविदुषा। ९ । नूनं ह्यार्या: साधव उपशमशीला: कृपणसुहृद एवंविधार्थे स्वार्थानपि गुरुतरानुपेक्षन्ते। १० |
Moved with compassion at the sight of the helpless young deer, forsaken (by its mother)
and being swept away by the current, the royal sage picked it up and took it to the hermitage,
like a (true) friend, knowing itto be motherless. (7) As Bharata (now) intensely thought of the
young deer as his own (charge) and conceived an attachment for it by nourishing it,
protecting it (from wolves and other carnivorous animals), caressing it and humouring it (by
scratching and stroking its body) everyday, all his routine duties (such as bathing) including
practices of self-restraint as well as his devotional duties such as the worship of the Lord
came to be neglected one by one and (were all) actually abandoned in the course of a few
days. (8) "Oh, torn from its class as well as from its near and dear ones and alas ! brought
under my protection by the fast rotating wheel of Time, this helpless young deer has accepted.
me alone for its parents, kith and kin and mates, knowing no one else, and has great
confidence in me. Hence it behoves me (too) to nourish, protect (from enemies), gratify and
fondle in an uncavilling spirit this fawn exclusively depending on me, knowing as | do that it
is sinful to forsake him who seeks my protection. (9) Surely worthy and pious souls who are
given to self-control and are friends of the poor ignore their own big interests for the sake of
such (wretched) creatures." (10)

इति कृतानुषङ्ग आसनशयनाटनस्थानाशनादिषु TE मृगजहुना स्नेहानुबद्भधहदय आसीत्।११॥
कुशकुसुमसमित्पलाशफलमूलोदकान्याहरिष्यमाणो वृकसालावृकादिभ्यो भयमांशसमानो यदा सह
हरिणकुणकेन at समाविशति।१२]। पथिषु च मुग्धभावेन तत्र aa विषक्तमतिप्रणयभरहदय:
कार्पण्यात्स्कन्धेनोद्वहति एवमुत्सङ्गे sha चाधायोपलालयन्मुदं परमामवाप।१३]। क्रियायां
निर्वर्त्यमानायामन्तरालेऽप्युत्थायोत्थाय यदॆनमभिचक्षीत तर्हि वाव स वर्षपति: प्रकृतिस्थेन मनसा तस्मा
आशिष आशास्ते स्वस्ति स्ताद्वत्स ते सर्वत इति। १४1
Having thus developed an attachment for it, Bharata’s heart remained knit with bonds of

love to that young of a deer even while he sat (on the ground), lay asleep, sauntered (here
and there), remained standing, ate his food and on other such occasions. (11) When he
