Dis. 14] BOOK FIVE 489

REHEAT HRE AAS E CEREAL SEH EHAAH TES er rE HAHAH eee eee HAH eee ih
त्प्तर्त्त १६ Kea

even as a lamb (by shepherds). (3) Justas a field, in spite of its being ploughed (and cleared
of weeds and grass etc.), every year, grows dense as it were with shrubs, grass and creepers
at the time of sowing seeds again; in cases where the (very) seeds have not been burnt (by
fire), so is the case with the life of a householder—a field for sowing the seeds‘of actions—
where actions never come to an end; for this stage of life is (after all) a storehouse of desires
(which are the seeds of actions of various kinds). (4)

eli A lll! de 1221

In the aforesaid stage of life their wealth (which constitutes their external life-breath as
it were) is squeezed by men, vile as gnats and mosquitoes, as well as by locusts, birds
(peacocks etc.), thieves, rats and so on. Now, sauntering on the aforementioned road (of
worldly life) with a mind corrupted by ignorance, desire and actions, they erroneously regard
this mortal world—which is as unreal as an imaginary city (seen in the sky through optic
illusion) as real (lit., something whose existence is proved). (5) Again, on that road they
pursue sometimes the mirage-like pleasures of sense, fondly addicted as they are to the
vicious habits of eating (delicious food), drinking (wine), copulation and so on. (6) Now, even
as one tormented with a longing to get fire may pursue ignis fatuus, they run after gold, the
(mere) excreta of fire and the abode of all evils, their mind being swayed by the quality of
Rajas which is of the same colour as gold and therefore bears a natural affinity toit. (7) Again,
sometimes, with their thought centred on their dwelling, water, wealth and other things
essential to life, they run about here and there in the forest of worldly existence. (8) And
now placed on the lap (embraced) by a young woman throwing dust in their eyes like a
whirlwind, and steeped as it were in ignorance due to the element of Rajas prevailing at
the time, they abandon the path of the virtuous. And their reason being entirely clouded
with passion, they—like one whose eyes are blinded with dust—no longer perceive (mind)
the deities presiding over the quarters (who witness all their doings). (9) Sometimes, in
spite of their having spontaneously realized but for a moment the illusory nature of sense-
objects, they are deprived of their reason by identifying themselves with the body (which
is other than their self); and, guided by the same (perverted reason), they run after those
very objects, which are as deceptive and tantalizing as a mirage. (10) Now their ears and
heart are extremely tormented by the threats of enemies and the royal court; conveyed in
the sternest spirit and with an overbearing demeanour before their very eyes, like the
hooting of owls, (by the king's servants) and behind their back, like the (shrill) notes of the
cricket (by the enemies). (11)

स चदा दुग्धपूर्वसुकृतस्तदा कारस्करकाकतुण्डाद्यपुण्यद्रुमलताविषोदपानवदुभयार्थशून्यद्रविणान्
जीवन्मृतान्स्वयंजीवन्म्रियमाण उपधावति | १२ ।एकदासत्प्रसङ्घान्निकृतमतिर्व्यदकस्त्रोत:स्खलनवदुभयतोऽपि
Gad पाखण्डमभियाति | १३॥ यदा तु परबाधयान्ध आत्मने नोपनमति cer fe पितृपुत्रबर्हिष्मत:

पितृपुत्रान्
वा स खलु भक्षवति। ¢% क्वचिदासाद्य गृहं दाववत्परियार्थविधुरमसुखोदर्कं शोकाग्निना दह्यमानो yet
निबदफ्णाच्छति!श्णांक्याचन्कालावघाग्मत्तरानङ्कृरश्नसम्पग्त्तम्पयतग्मधनासु प्रमृतक इव विगतजीवलक्षण

[564] B. M. 18— `
