Dis. 75 ] BOOK TEN 437

PMN ENEE ES PRET TE VESTS EEE PEE FETE LEST ERE EE EEE EE ELE ECR ETRE ETON EWEN REE स्रे न

a सम्राड रथमारूढ: wed रुक्ममालिनम्।व्यरोचत स्वपत्नीभि: क्रियाभि: क्रतुराडिव ive!
पत्नीसंयाजावभृध्यैश्चरित्वा ते तमृत्विज: | आचान्तं स्नापयाञ्चक्रुर्गङ्गायां ve कृष्णया ।१९॥
meg नेदुर्नरदुन्दुभिभि: समम्।मुमुदु: पुष्पवर्षाणि देवर्षिपितृमानवा: 1२०॥
सस्नुस्तत्र तत: सर्वे वर्णाश्रमयुता नरा: । महापातक्यपि aa: सद्यो मुच्येत किल्बिषात् 1221
अथ राजाहते att परिघाय स्वलङ्कृत: | ऋत्विक्सदस्यविप्रादीनानर्चाभरणाम्बरै: 1२२॥
बन्धुज्ञातिनृपान् मित्रसुहृदोऽन्यांश्च सर्वश:। अभीक्ष्णं पूजयामास नारायणपरो नृप: 1231

सर्वे जना: सुररुचो मणिकुण्डलस्रगुष्णीषकञ्चुकदुकूलमहार्घ्यहारा: |

नार्यश्च कुण्डलयुगालकवृन्दजुष्टवक्त्रश्रि: कनकमेखलया fate: 1२४॥

Seated in his chariot drawn by the best horses and decked with gold necklaces, Emperor
Yudhisthira with Draupadi and other consorts looked as if the great sacrifice Rajastya with
the attendant rituals had assumed human forms. (18) After the ritual known by the name
Patni-Sarmyaja and the rites connected with the concluding ablutions had been over, the king
performed Acamana (sipped water born the palm of his hand), and, as directed by priests,
bathed in the Ganga alongwith Draupadi.(19) At that time the drums of celestials sounded
in the heavens joined with the sounding of drums by men; and the gods. Rsis, manes and
men showered flowers. (20) After the Emperor had finished his ablutions, people belonging
to all castes and stages of life took their dips in the Ganga; for a bath at that time rids even
the most sinful of their sins forthwith. (21) Then Yudhisthira put a piece of new silk cloth round
his foins and another round his shoulders and adorning himself with ornaments, he honoured
the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice as well as other Brahmanas with gifts of cloth and
ornaments. (22) Pariksit, asincere devotee of God, the Emperor saw God in every being and
honoured all his relations and kinsmen, brother princes, friends and well-wishers, and other
ordinary folk again and again. (23) Wearing jewelled ear-rings, garlands of flowers, turbans,
long coats, pieces of silk and costly necklaces of pearls all these people looked like gods
come down on earth. And the women looked exceptionally charming with the beauty of their
faces enhanced by their ear-rings and their overhanging locks, and with the zones of gold
lying round their hips. (24)

safest महाशीला: सदस्या ब्रह्मवादिन: । ब्रह्मक्षत्रियविद्शुद्रा राजानो ये समागता: 1241
देवर्षिपितृभूतानि wee: सहानुगा: । पूजितास्तमनुज्ञाप्य स्वधामानि ययुर्नृप ।२६॥
हरिदासस्य राजर्षे राजसूयमहोदयम् । नैवातृप्यन् प्रशंसन्त: पिबन् Delf यथा । २७॥
aa युधिष्ठिरो राजा सुहृत्सम्वन्धिबान्धवान्। Som निवासयामास कृष्णं च त्यागकातर: । २८।
were arg न्यवात्सीत्तत्प्रियङ्कर: | प्रस्थाप्य यदुवीरांश्च साम्बादींश्च कुशास्थलीम् । २९1

1 राजा धर्मसुतो मनोरथमहार्णवम्। सुदुस्तरं समुत्तीर्य कृष्णेनासीद् गतज्वर: 1301

Pariksit, all those who had assembled there—priests of high character, supervisors of the
sacrifice well-versed in the Vedas, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sddras, princes,
gods, Rsis, manes and members of other classes of beings, Indra and the other protectors
of the world with their attendants—now took leave of Yudhisthira, and returned to their
respective abodes, receiving appropriate honours from the Emperor. (25-26) Just as a
mortal would never feel satisfied with a drink of nectar, so they did not get tired of praising
the grand success of the RajasUya sacrifice performed by the saintly King Yudhisthira, who
was a great devotee of God. (27) The Emperor lovingly detained his kinsmen, friends and
relations and also Bhagavan Sri Krsna at his capital, for he could not even bear the idea of
their separation. (28) Sending away Samba, his other sons as well as the principal Yadava

