Dis. 33 ] BOOK TEN 241

eH CO त्त न HOE COLE EE CULAR TWERER ETT VOT eS CEES Eee eT RR IGN, क AOR TR RRR TH HH

(from her braid due to langour). (11) Smelling the arm—emitting the fragrance of a water-lily
and smeared with sandal, paste and resting on one of her shoulders—of Sri Krsna, (yet)
another of those Gopis (Syamala) kissed it, so itis said, the hair on her body standing on end
(due to joy). (12) To a certain 0० (presumably Saibya) who united with His cheek her own
lit up with the lustre of her ear-ring tossed by the dance, the Lord gave His half-chewed betel(13)
Fatigued while dancing and singing with her anklets and girdle jingling (with the
movement of her feet), another (Gopi, most probably Bhadra), pressed to her bosom the
soothing lotus-like palm of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) standing beside her.(14)

Tet लब्ध्वाच्युतं कान्तं fra एकान्तवल्लभम् | YeiRUSTRTE aT गायन्त्यस्तं विजह्रिरे 184!

गोप्य: समं भगवता ननृतु: स्वकेशस्त्रस्तस्रजो TTT TAL 18 |

रेमे रमेशो व्रजसुन्दरीभिर्यथार्भक: स्वप्रतिविम्बविभ्रम: । १७।

तदङ्गसङ्घप्रमुदाकुलेन्द्रार केशान् TRG कुचपट्टिकां वा ।

wa: प्रतिव्योढुमलें ब्रजस्रियो विस्रस्तमालाभरणा: कुरूद्वह । १८॥
कृष्णविक्रीडितं वीक्ष्य मुमुहु: खेचरस्तिय: । कामार्दिता: दाशाङ्कश्च सगणो विस्मितोऽभवत् । १९1
wal तावन्तमात्मानं यावतीर्गोपयोषित: । रेमे स भगवांस्ताभिरात्मारामोऽपि लीलया 1201
तासामतिविहारेण श्रान्तानां वदनानि स: । प्रामृजत् करुण: प्रेम्णा शन्तमेनाङ्गपाणिना । २१1

Tre: स्फुरत्पुरटकुण्डलकुन्तलत्विड्गण्डश्रिया सुधितहासनिरीक्षणेन ।

मानं दधत्य ऋषभस्य जगु: कृतानि पुण्यानि तत्कररुहस्पर्शप्रमोदा: 1221

aie: श्रममपोहितुमङ्गसङ्घ yess: स कुचकुङ्कुमरञ्जिताया: ।

गन्धर्वपालिभिरनुद्रु आविशद् a: श्रान्तो गजीभिरिभराडिव भिन्नसेतु: । २३।

सोऽम्भस्यलं युवतिभि: परिषिच्यमान: प्रेष्णेक्षित: प्रहसतीभिरितस्ततोऽङ्ग |

तैमानिकै: कुसुमवर्षिभिरीड्यमानो रेमे स्वयं स्वरतिरत्र गजेन्द्रलील: । २४

तत्तश्च कृष्णोपवने जलस्थलप्रसूनगन्धानिलजुष्टदिक्तरे |

चचार भृङ्गप्रमदागणावृतो यथा मदच्चुदु द्विरद: करेणुभि: । २५॥

एवं शशाङ्कांशुविराजिता fe: स सत्यकामोऽनुरताबलागण: |

सिषेव आत्मन्यवरुद्धसौरत:र सर्वा+ ङशरत्काव्यकथारसाश्रया: ।२६॥

Having thus secured Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the only Beloved of Sri (the goddess
of beauty and prosperity), as their Darling, and celebrating Him in song, the Gopis sported
(with Him), their necks encircled by His arms. (15) The cowherd women—the charm of whose
face was heightened by the water-lilies adorning their ears, cheeks graced with their (curly)
locks and drops of sweat (glistening on their forehead)—danced with the Lord, keeping time
by (the jingling of) bangles, anklets and girdle, that served as (so many) musical instruments,
the garlands dropping from their braids, in that assembly of Rasa dancers, where (humming)
black bees played the role of songsters (all other music—both vocal and instrumental—
having stopped due to the Gopis being exhausted). (16) Thus by embracing them, touching
them with His hands, casting loving glances at them. making unrestrained amorous gestures

and laughing heartily, Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu, the Spouse of Rama)
sported with those lovely women of Vraja (even) as an infant would olay with its own
