560 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

SEER CREEL AERO O HAE NT THETA ERSE OER RET NE AT UREN OE ERET HEE AREA T AREER Ene COTnnneene

Clothed in a body man performs actions which result in misery. In consequence of those
actions he assumes another body and thus living in the world the mortal man enjoys little
happiness. (29) The regions of the universe and their rulers who live till the end of a Kalpa
are afraid of Me; even Brahma who lives for two Parardhas only is afraid of Me. (30) The
senses bring about actions and the Gunas prompt the senses to act, and the said Jiva, being
invested with bodies and senses and identifying itself with them, reaps the fruit of
actions.(31) So long as the diversity of the Gunas prevails the Atma will appear manifold. And
so long as the manifoldness of Atma lasts dependent state will continue. (32) So long as the
state of dependence of the Jiva continues there is fear from the Lord. Therefore, those who
take to these Gunas get deluded, and come to grief. (33) Time, Atma, Sastra, the world,
Nature and Dharma are the various names by which | am called when the equilibrium of the
three (illusive) qualities is disturbed or they are agitated. (34)

TEI उवाच

गुणेषु वर्तमानोऽपि देहजेष्टनपावृत:।गुणैर्नबढ्योदेहॊबद्ध्यतेवाकथंविभो।रे,५|

कथं वर्तेत विहरेत् कैर्वा ज्ञायेत लक्षणै: । किं भुञ्जीतोत विसृजेच्छयीतासीत याति वा । ३६॥

Wega मे gfe प्रश्नं प्रश्नविदां वा।नित्यपुंक्तोनित्यबद्धएकएबेतिपेभ्रप;।इध्रा
Uddhava said : O Lord, though associated with a body etc., why should not the Jiva be
bound by actions begotten of body ? Or having no connection with them, how does the soul
get tied to them ? (35) How does a Person liberated or bound behave or sport and by what
characteristics is he to be known ? How does he eat, ease nature, sleep, sit or walk ? (36)
० Acyuta, the foremost of those expert in answering questions ! (pray) answer this question

My mistaken notion is as to whether the same Atma is (both) ever bound and ever liberated
(too). (37)

Thus ends the tenth discourse forming part of the Dialogue between the Lord and Uddhava,
in Book Eleven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

<tingtwet:
PITRE rics

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI!

The characteristics of bound and liberated souls as well as of devotees

श्रीभगवानुवाच
बद्धोपुक्तइत्तिव्याख्यागुणतोपैनवस्तुत:।गुण्प्त्यपायापूलत्वात्रपैपोक्षोनबन्धनम्।श्।
weit सुखं दु:खं देहापत्तिश्च मायया । स्वप्नो यथाऽऽत्मन: ख्याति: संसृतिर्न तु वास्तवी । २ ।
विद्याबिद्येप्रपतनूव्रिद्धचुद्धवक्लीरिंणष्प_।पोक्ष्न्धांआद्येपाण्यापेविनिर्मिते।इ।
एकस्थैव ome जीवस्थैव महामते । बन्धोऽस्याविद्ययानादिर्विद्यया च तथेतर: । ४ ।
