60 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

AHHARDHSASARRAARSREALSLEELASeCECEHELEELAH SH ang HaSe Ase eee peeeerawmnreeennygkeerite

स्रीरत्नैरावृता: क्रीडन् रेवाम्भसि मदोत्कट: । वैजयन्तीं स्रजं बिभ्रद् sda afd भुजै: ।२०॥
विप्लावितं स्वशिबिरं प्रतिस्रोत:सरिज्जलै: । नामृष्यत् तस्य oe ad वीरमानी ear: । २१॥
गृहीतो लीलया स्रीणां wae कृतकिल्बिष: । माहिष्मत्यां संनिरुद्धो मुक्तो aa कपिर्यथा 1221
Sri Suka replied : Having propitiated Lord Datta (better known as Dattatreya), a part
manifestation of Lord Narayana, through acts of worship, Arjuna, the jewel among the
Ksatriyas and the then ruler of the Haihayas, had secured a thousand arms, formidableness
in the eyes of foes, uninterrupted soundness of the senses and organs of action, affluence,
glory, prowess, fame and bodily strength, mastery of Yoga and superhuman power which
was characterized by virtues such as the capacity to assume an atomic form. His movement
being unimpeded (everywhere), he went about the worlds like the wind. (17—19) Sporting
in the water of the Reva (Narmada), surrounded by jewels among women and intoxicated
with excessive pride, King Arjuna, who wore anecklace made of precious stones of the (well-
known) nine varieties, obstructed (the stream of) the river with his (thousand) arms. (20)
Finding his (military) encampment inundated by the water of the river flowing upwards,
Ravana (the ten-headed monster), who thought himself to be a (great) hero, did not brook
this (show of) valour (on the part) of Arjuna. (21) Having offended against Arjuna, Ravana
was seized by way of sport in the presence of those women (by Arjuna) and was imprisoned
in Mahismati (his capital) like a monkey and (eventually) set free. (22)

स एकदा तु gna विचरन् विपिने वने ! यदृच्छयाऽऽश्रमपदं जमदग्नेरुपाविशत् | २३॥
wa स नरदेवाय मुनिरर्हणमाहरत्। ससैन्यामात्यवाहाय हविष्मत्या तपोधन: ।२४॥
a वीरस्तत्र तद दृष्टां आत्मैश्चर्यातिशायनम्। तन्नाद्रियताग्निहोत्र्रां साभिलाष: स dea: ।२५॥
हविर्धानीमृषेर्दर्पान्नरान् हर्तुमचोदयत्। a च माहिष्मतीं निन्यु: सवत्सां क्रन्दतीं बलात् । २६॥
अथ राजनि fait राम आश्रम ama: । ge तत् तस्य दौरात्म्यं चुक्रोधाहिरिवाहत: ।२७॥

घोरमादाय परशुं सतूणं चर्म कार्मुकम्। अन्वधावतं दुर्धर्षो ate इव यूथपम् ।२८॥

Ranging in a dense forest in pursuit of game, on one occasion, Arjuna for his part found
his way perchance into the precincts of the hermitage of the sage Jamadagni. (23) By the
good offices of Kamadhenu (the cow of plenty) the sage, rich in asceticism, extended his
hospitality to that ruler of men including his army, ministers and animals carrying them. (24)
Seeing that affluence (of the sage), which surpassed his own, in that hermitage, and full of
longing for the cow of plenty (which was so useful for Agnihotra or pouring oblations into the
sacred fire, and which was responsible for all the affluence displayed by the sage), the hero
(Arjuna) including the (other) Haihayas (his kinsmen that had accompanied him in his
hunting expedition) did not make much of that hospitality. (25) In his arrogance the king (did
not think it necessary to seek the permission of the sage and) commanded his men to take
away the cow of plenty (lit., a storehouse of milk, ghee and so on, fit for being poured as
oblation into the sacred fire). And they (in their turn) forcibly took away to Mahismati the
screaming cow alongwith its calf. (26) Now, on the king having gone away Rama (who had
been out) returned to the hermitage and, having heard of his aforesaid. wickedness, flew into
a rage like a serpent that had been hit. (27) Taking his terrible axe, shield and bow with a
quiver, the formidable hero pursued the king like a lion (the king of beasts) chasing the leader
of a herd of elephants. (28)

तमापतन्तं भृगुवर्यमोजसा agit बाणपरश्वधायुधम्।
ऐणेयचर्माम्बरमर्कघामभिर्युतं जटाभिर्ददृशे ut विदन् । २९1
अचोदयद्धस्तिरथाश्वपत्तिभिर्गदासिबाणरष्टिशतघ्निशक्तिभि: ।

