Dis. 78] BOOK TEN 445

SRCRAHE CHAR LAAERAARENER ALTA AR ARERLAAARERARARORALRERRER RHEE SESE HERAT A AAAAHHAAAKERHH

(Now,) Salva vigorously attacked Sri Krsna with a volley of (destructive) weapons; but
Sri Krsna, possessed of unfailing prowess, pierced Salva with a shower of arrows and broke
into pieces his armour, bow and the jewel on his head. With the mace, the Lord smashed
Saiva’s aerial car, Saubha. (33) Struck by the powerful blow of Sri Krsna's mace, the car
broke into a thousand pieces and fell into the ocean. Leaving the car, Salva dropped down
on land and taking up his mace rushed headlong at Sri Krsna. (34) When the Lord saw him
advancing towards Him, He cut off with a spear the arm with which he held the mace. Then,
with a view to killing Salva, the Lord took up His wonderful discus, dazzling like the sun at
the time of universal destruction. Holding the discus in His hand, Sri Krsna vied in splendour
with the Eastern Hilb bearing the sun on its peak. (35) With that discus Sri Krsna lopped off
the head, adorned with a crown and ear-rings, of that repository of Maya, Salva, even as (in
the days of yore) Indra with his thunderbolt cut off the head of Vrtrasura. The fall of Salva in
battle raised anoutcry of distress among his men. (36) Pariksit, the gods sounded theirdrums
inheavenwhen the wicked Salva was struck down, andhisaerial car was smashed to pieces.
Now came the turn of Dantavaktra, another friend of Sigupala, who marched in great rage
against Sri Krsna to avenge the death of his friends, Sigupala and Salva. (37)

Thus ends the severty-seventh discourse entitled “ The Deliverance of Salva," in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

mat foe १=1:

अथाष्टसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXVIII
Deliverance of Dantavaktra and Viddratha; Sata killed by
Sri Balarama during His Pilgrimage

श्रीगुक उवाच
fea ङाल्वस्य पौण्ड्रकस्यापि दुर्मति: । परलोकगतानां च कुर्वन् पारोक्ष्यसौहदम् । १ ।
एक: पदाति: संक्रुद्धो गदापाणि: प्रकम्पयन्। पद्भ्यामिमां महाराज महासत्त्वो व्यदृश्यत | २ |
तं तथाऽऽयान्तमालोक्य गदामादाय सत्वर: | Taye रथात् कृष्ण: सिन्धुं वेलेव प्रत्यधात् । ३ ।
गदामुद्यम्य कारूषो मुकुन्दं प्राह दुर्मद: । दिष्ट्या दिष्ट्या भवानद्य मम दृष्टिपथं गत: । ४ |
त्वं मातुलेयो a: कृष्ण मित्रधुङ्खां जिघांससि । अतस्त्वां गदया मन्द हनिष्ये वज्रकल्पया । ५ ।
तर्यानृण्यमुपैप्यज्ञ मित्राणां मित्रवत्सल: । बन्धुरूपमरि हत्वा व्याधिं देहचरं यथा । ६ ।
एवं रूक्षैस्तुदन् वाक्यै: कृष्णं dia द्विपम्। गदया ताडयन्मूर्नि सिंहवद् sae स: । ७ |
गदयाभिहतोऽप्याजौ न चचाल यदूद्वह: । कृष्णोऽपि तमहन् yed कौमोदक्या स्तनान्तरे । ८ ।
गदानिर्भिन्नहदय उद्बमन् रुधिरं मुखात्। प्रसार्य केशबाह्वङ्घ्रीन् धरण्यां न्यपतद्व्यसु: । ९ ।
wa: सूक्ष्मतरं ज्योति: कृष्णमाविशदद्भुतम्। पङ्यतां सर्वभूतानां यथा चैद्यवधे नृप । १०॥
Sri Suka began again : Dantavaktra was a great friend of Sigupala, Salva and

Paundraka, who had met their death at the hands of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. In order to avenge
their death the fool appeared all alone to fight Sn Krsna. Full of rage he (neither took an army
