Dis. 23] BOOK THREE 241

We erie ee RR ee Ste er et ता He ee rte aie er trier sr शे ree Be डो ती जोत्त BT EPO TT HEMT जा TH eM REE HAT

aerial mansion, O destroyer of enemy (in the form of passion). (86-37) Though (seemingly)
attached to his beloved consort and with Vidyadhara damsels ministering to his bodily
comfort (and gazing on his person), the sage did not lose his glory (mastery over his self)
and shone in that aerial mansion as charming as the moon with his consort (the star Rohini)
in the midst of the other lunar mansions in the vault of heavens, causing rows of lilies to
open.(38) Waited upon by a bevy of charming damsels and extolled by hosts of Siddhas,
he revelled in the aerial mansion like Kubera (the god of riches) for long long years over
the valleys of Mount Meru (the prince of the leading mountains on the globe), the
pleasure-ground of the guardians of the four quarters and the four intermediate points of
the compass*—valleys which are rendered all the more delightful by cool, gentle and
fragrant breezes that stimulate passion and echo the auspicious sound of the fall of the
heavenly stream (the holy Ganga). (39)

ars सुरसने नन्दने पुष्पभद्रके । मानसे चैत्ररथ्ये च स रेमे रामया रत: ।४०।

भ्राजिष्णुना far कामगेन महीयसा । वैमानिकानत्यशेत चरल्लोकान् यथानिल: ।४१॥
fe दुरापादनं तेषां पुंसामुद्दामचेतसाम्। यैराश्रितस्तीर्थपदश्चरणो व्यसनात्यय: ।४२॥

Similarly, he fondly enjoyed himself with his wife in (the heavenly gardens known by
the names of) Vaigrambhaka, Surasana, Nandana, Puspabhadra and Caitrarathya as well
as over the Manasarovara lake. (40) Coursing through the various spheres, as the air, on
that brilliant and great aerial mansion, that could fly at will, Kardama surpassed even the
gods coursing through the air (whose movements are restricted to their own particular
sphere). (41) What is difficult of achievement for those self-possessed men who have
taken refuge in the feet of the Lord—feet that are the source of sacred rivers (like the
Ganga) and put an end to the sorrows (of mundane life)? (42)

प्रेक्षयित्वा भुवो गोलं पत्न्यै यावान् स्वसंस्थया । वह्वाश्चर्यं महायोगी स्वाश्रमाय न्यवर्तत ।४३॥
विभज्य नवधाऽऽत्मानं मानवीं सुरतोत्सुकाम्। रामाँ निरमयन् रेमे वर्षपूगान्मुहूर्तवत् ।४४॥
तस्मिन् विमान उत्कृष्टां शय्यां रतिकरीं श्रिता । न चाबुध्यत तं कालं पत्यापीच्येन सङ्घता ।४५॥
एवं योगानुभावेन दम्पत्यो रममाणयो: । ad व्यतीयु: ae: कामलालसयोर्मनाक् ve |
तस्यामाधत्त रेतस्तां भावयन्नात्मनाऽऽत्मवित्। नोधा विधाय रूपं स्वं सर्वसङ्कल्पविद्विभु: ।४७।
अत: सा सुषुवे सद्यो देवहूति: स्रिय: प्रजा: | सर्वास्ताश्चारुसर्वाङ्ग्यो लोहितोत्पलगन्धय: ।`४८1
off सा प्रव्रजिष्यन्तं तदाऽऽलक्ष्योशाती सती । स्मयमाना विक्लवेन हृदयेन विदूयता ।४९॥
लिखन्त्यधोमुखी भूमिं पदा नखमणिश्रिया । उवाच ललितां ard निरुध्याश्रुकलां aA: 140!

* The names of the gods presiding over the four quarters and the four intermediate points of the compass are given

below:—

Name of god Quarter or point of the compass over which he presides
1. Indra (the lord of paradise) East

2. Agni (the god of fire) South-East

3. Yama (the god of punishment) South

4, Nitrti South-West

5. Varuna (the god presiding over the waters) Wesi

6. Vayu (ihe wind-god) North-West

7. Kubera (ine god of riches) Nonh

8. ig4na (Lord Siva) North-East
