426 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 72

SIRI IR DIIOCIC On nn omni ree i re see tee pee ees ee

शब्दस्तयो: प्रहरतोरिभयोरिवासीन्निर्घातवज्रपरुषस्तलताडनोत्थ: । ३८॥
`तयोरेवे प्रहरतोर समशिक्षाबलौजसो: । निर्विहोषमभूद् युद्धमक्षीणजवयोर्नृप 1३९॥
एवं तयोर्महाराज युध्यतो: सप्तविंशति: । दिनानि निरगंस्तत्र Bestar तिष्ठतो: ॥४०॥

The glorious Lord said : “ 0 great king, we are no Brahmanas seeking food from you.
We have come here in search of a combat. If it pleases you, grant us the boon of a single
combat with you. (28) Thatis Bhima son of Kunti, he is his younger brother, Arjuna, and know
Me to be their cousin, Krsna, your former adversary." (29) Hearing these words of Sri Krsna,
Jarasandha laughed loudly and, filled with rage, said, " If you seek a combat, fools, | shall
certainly offer fight with you. (30) But, Krsna, | shall not fight with you. You are a coward and
rose balance of mind in battle. Afraid of me you abandoned your city, Mathura, and took
shelter in the sea. (31) As for Arjuna, he is no warrior.-He is junior to me in age and has no
great prowess either. He is, therefore, no match for me. Bhima (alone) is equal in strength
to me." (32) With these words Jarasandha gave a huge mace to Bhimasena, and himself
taking up another, came out of the city. (33) Going to the arena these two warriors who were
furious in battle, closed with and struck each other with their respective maces, which were
as hard as the thunderbolt. (34) They began to move right and left, manoeuvring for position
with such adroitness that they looked like two actors playing at fight on a public stage. (35)
When they hurled their maces at each other, the rattling noise resembled the clap of thunder
or the sound of impact between the tusks of two fighting tuskers. (36) Just as when two
elephants burning with rage fight with each other, with twigs of the sun-plant and the twigs
are reduced to powder, even so the maces of the two warriors hurled with the full force of their
arms against each other's shoulders, hips, feet, hands, thighs and collar-bones, were
reduced to pulp. (37) Thus when their maces fell broken, the two warriors full of rage struck
each other with their fists as hard as steel. As they fought like two elephants, the blows they
dealt at each other with their palms produced a sound as sharp as the clap of thunder. (38)
Pariksit, Jarasandha and Bhimasena were equally matched so far as training, strength and
vigour were concerned and both fought with unabated violence; yet their contest remained
undecided. (38) Though engaged in a mortal fight during the day-time, they lived as friends
during the nights. In this way twenty-seven days passed. (40)

Wael मातुलेवं वै प्राह राजन् वृकोद्र: । न झक्तोऽहं जरासन्धं निर्जेतुं युधि माधव ।४१॥
शात्रोर्जन्ममृती विद्वान् जीवितं च जराकृतम्। पार्थमाप्यायवन् स्वेन तेजसाचिन्तयद्धरि: 121
सञ्चिन्त्यारिवधोपायं भीमस्यामोघदर्शन: । दर्शयामास विटपं पाटयन्निव संज्ञया ४३
aq विज्ञाय महासत्त्वो भीम: प्रहरतां वर: ! गृहीत्वा पादयो: Ta पातयामास भूतले ।४४।
एक पादं पदाऽऽक्रम्य dai प्रगृह्य स: । गुदत: पाटयामास TIS महागज: ।४५॥
एकपादोरुवूषणकटिपृष्ठस्तनांसके । एकबाह्वक्षिभ्रूकर्णे serch cag: प्रजा: Ie!
हाहाकारो महानासीन्निहते मगधेश्वरे। पूजयामासतुर्भीमं परिरभ्य जयाच्युतौ Ivo
wea oad भगवान् भूतभावन:। अभ्यषिञ्चदमेयात्मा मगधानां oda प्रभु: ।
मोचयामास राजन्यान् संरुद्धा APTA ये ॥४८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां caer उत्तरार्धे जगमन्धवधा नाम द्विसप्ततितमोऽध्याय: 1ऽ२]
Pariksit, on the twenty-eighth day Bhima said to his cousin, SriKrsna, "Krsna, /am unable
to overthrow Jarasandha ina duel.” (41) SriKrsna, who knew the secret of Jarasandha’s birth

and death, (viz.,) how the demoness Jara joined his body divided into two and conferred life
on him, considered the matter and comforting Bhimasena infused His own strength into the

