Dis. 73 ] BOOK TEN 427

SEE Se EE YEE NENT TEREST ET ELE EE EET Ee Le EN TT

latter. (42) Having hit upon the plan of overthrowing the enemy, Sri Krsna, whose insight was
infallible, took up a twig and split it into two by way of a signal to demonstrate to Bhimasena
how to do it. (43) The foremost warrior of enormous strength, Bhima, understood what was
tobe conveyed tohim and taking hold of Jarasandhaby the feet threw him on the ground.({44)
Pressing a foot of the enemy with one foot, he took hold of the other with both his hands, and
split him into two from the anus, as 8 huge elephant splits up a twig. (45) The people saw the
two halves of Jarasandha’s person each with one foot, one thigh, one testicle, one hip, half
the back and one breast; one shoulder, one arm, one eye, one eyebrow and one ear. (46)
Great was the outcry among his subjects when Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, fell.
Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna greeted Bhimasena by embracing him. (47) The Almighty
Lord, Bhagavan S11 Krsna, is the life-giver of all creatures; no one can fathom His greatness.
Having installed Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, on the throne of Magadha, he set at liberty
all the kings who had been imprisoned by Jarasandha. (48)

Thus ends the seventy-second discourse entitled “Jarasandha killed”, in the fatter
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Stet ath:
erie

अथ त्रिसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXiili

Sri Krsna and others return to Indraprastha

sie उवाच

अयुते द्वे शतान्यष्ठौ लीलया gfe निर्जिता: । ते निर्गता गिरिद्रोण्यां मलिना मलवासस: | १ ।
क्षुक्षामा: ere: संरोधपरिकर्शिता: । ददृशुस्ते घनश्यामं पीतकोशेयवाससम् | २ ।
श्रीवत्साङ्कुं चतुर्बाहुं पद्मगर्भारुणेक्षणम् ! चारुप्रसन्नवदनं स्फुरन्प्रकरकुण्डलम् । ३ |
पद्महस्तं गक्याङ्खग्थाङ्गमालक्षितम्।किंरींब्दप्नक्काटिंमून्राङ्गद्दाक्तिम् । ४ ।

भ्राजद्वरमणिग्रीवं fet samedi fen इव aaeal लिहन्त इव जिह्वया । ५ |

feat ga नासाभ्याँ wad ga बाहुभि: । प्रणेमुर्हतपाप्मानो मूर्धभि: पादयोर्हरे: । ६ ।

कृष्णसन्दर्शनाह्लादध्वस्तसंरोधनकृमा: । प्रशकषंसुर्हृषीकेशं गीर्भि: seat नूपा: । ७ |
Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, Jarasandha had subdued in battle without much effort
twenty thousand and eight hundred Ksatriya princes and had confined them in a place
surrounded by mountains on all sides. Released by Bhagavan Sri Krsna, they came out of
their captivity with unclean bodies and dirty clothes. (1) They had been emaciated with
hunger and their faces were lank. The long confinement had considerably reduced their
weight. Coming out of the prison, they saw Lord Sri Krsna standing before them. Having a
complexion dark as the cloud, cladin yellowsilken robes and possessed of fourarms, holding
a lotus in one hand and wielding the mace, conch and discus with others, bearing the mark
of Stivatsa (a curl of hair) on the breast, with eyes reddish like the interior of a lotus, witha
lovely and cheerful face, adomed with glowing ear-rings shapedlike the alligator, and decked
with a crown, a necklace of pearls, bracelets and girdle and a pair of armlets, the jewel
Kaustubha shining in His neck and a garland of sylvan flowers hanging on His breast, the
sight of the Lord kept them spellbound. They seemed to drink Him with their eyes, lick Him
with their tongues, inhale Him with their nose and embrace Him with their arms. All their sins
