Dis. 20 ] BOOK FOUR 379

wa: fra qua आर्यसङ्गमे यदृच्छया aus a सकृत्।
aa yom faa wl श्रीर्यत्रवव्रे गुणसंग्रहेच्छया । २६॥
अप्यावयोरेकपतिस्पृधो: कलिर्न स्यात्कृतत्वच्चरणॆकतानयो: 1219 |
जगज्जनन्यां wide aad wea यत्कर्मणि a: समीहितम् ।
- करोषि फल्ग्वप्युरु दीनवत्सल: स्व wa धिष्ण्येऽभिरतस्य fe तया ।२८॥
wey wad ww weal व्युदस्तमायागुणविभ्रमोदयम्।
भवत्पदानुस्मरणादृते सतां निमित्तमन्यद्भगवन्न विद्महे ।२९।
वाचा नु den यदि ते जनोऽसित: कथं ga: ad करोति मोहित: 1301
त्वन्माययाद्धा जन ईंश खण्डितो यदन्यदाशास्त ऋतात्मनोऽबुध: |
यथा aged fr wa am त्वमेवार्हसि a: समीहितुम् । ३१।

Prthu said : How could a wise man ask boons—enjoyable by those whose mind is
engrossed in the world of matter—of You, O omnipresent Lord, the Ruler of those capable
of conferring boons (on their votaries) ! | too would never ask of You, O Lord, the Bestower
of final beatitude, boons which are available even to the denizens of hell. (23) | crave not
under any circumstance even final beatitude, where there is no (occasion for enjoying the)
nectar of Your lotus-feet, oozing from the inmost heart of the most exalted souls through their
lips. (Therefore,) pray, endow me with ten thousand ears (to enable me to drink to my heart's
fill the nectar-like praises of the Lord); this is the boon (I ask of You).(24) O Lord of excellent
renown ! even the air (breath) laden with drops of the nectar of Your lotus-feet, issuing from
the mouth of exalted souls, restores the knowledge of Self to us, fallen Yogis, who have
forgotten the path leading to (the realization of) the Truth. Hence we require no more
boons. (25) How can a man of flair—who has accidentally heard Your auspicious praises
in the society of noble souls only once, O Lord of excellent fame, feel sated, unless he is a
veritable brute—with the glory, which even Sri (the Goddess of beauty and prosperity) has
gladly adopted as a theme of Her songs, keen to imbibe Your virtues. (26) Full of ardent
longing, therefore, | would, like Laksmi (who is distinguished by a lotus in Her hand), adore
with all my being You, the highest of all embodied beings and the abode ofall excellences.
Let there be no bickering between us two, who are competing for the service of a common
lord and who have focussed our mind on Your feet alone. (27) Jealousy is sure to be aroused.
O Lord of the universe, in (the mind of) Goddess Laksmi (the Mother of the universe) whose
role (of devoted service to Your feet) it is my desire to share. But fondas You are of the meek,
You make much even of their trifling services. And rejoicing as You doin Your own Self, You
have nothing to do even with Her (Goddess Laksmi). (28) It is therefore that even after
attaining wisdom pious souls worship You alone, who dispel the delusion caused in the mind
of Your devotees by the modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas). (As a matter of fact,)
we know of no other purpose than the constant remembrance of Your feet in the life of noble
souls, O Lord. (29) The words "Ask (of Me) aboon (of your choice)" that You (just) addressed
to me, engaged in worshipping You(ina disinterested spirit), reckon as intended to delude
the creatures (of the world). If the people were not bound by the cords of Your speech (the
Veda), wherefore should they take to action (with interested motives) under a spell of
delusion ? (30) Indeed man has been split from You, his real Self, by Your Maya (deluding
potency), O Lord: that is why the stupid fellow hankers for other things. (Nevertheless,) even
