278 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31 -

क ती कक व क्तैत् कौ उ उ ककक दौ क दौ क वी य दौक ज् दौक कौ द्दि यैती कीं केड य EELEK ESET AHA EET HATH कौ THAAD EH

Sting or bite the babe, who is most tender of skin and deprived of its wisdom (acquired in the
womb), cries (bitterly). (27)

gad ज्ञैशावं भुक्त्वा दु:खं पौगण्डमेव च । अलब्धाभीप्सितोऽज्ञानादिद्धमन्यु: द्युचार्पित: । २८॥
सह देहेन मानेन वर्धमानेन मन्युना । करोति fase कामी apa चात्मन: ।२९॥
भूतै: पञ्चभिरारब्धे देहे देह्यबुधोऽसकृत्। अहंममेत्यसद्ग्राह: करोति कुमतिर्मतिम् ।३०॥
तदर्थं qed कर्म यद्वद्धो याति संसृतिम्। योऽनुयाति ददत्केशमविद्याकर्मबन्धन: 1321
agers: पथि ua: शिश्नोदरकृतोद्यमै: | आस्थितो wa जन्तुस्तमो विदाति पूर्ववत् ।३२।
सत्यं wiki दया मौनं gfe: श्रीर्हीर्यशा: क्षमा । wal. दमो asia यत्सङ्गाद्याति सङ्घषयम् ।३३॥
तेष्वशान्तेषु मूढेषु सखण्डितात्मस्वसाधुषु as न कुर्याच्छोच्येषु योषित्क्रीडामृगेषु च ।३४॥
न तथास्य भवेन्मोहो बन्धश्चान्यप्रसङ्घत: | योषित्सङ्गाद्यथा पुंसो यथा तत्सङ्घिसङ्घत: 1341
प्रजापति: wi deat ap तद्रूपधर्षित: । रोहिद्भूतां सोऽन्वधावदृक्षरूपी हतत्रप: 1361
तत्सृष्टसृष्टसृष्टेषु को न्वखण्डितधी: पुमान्।ऋषिं नारायणमृते योषिन्मय्येह मायया 1301
aes मे पश्य मायाया: स्रीमय्या जयिनो दिशाम् at करोति पदाक्रान्तान् भ्रूविजृम्भेण केवलम् । ३८।

Having similarly gone through the painful experiences of infancy and boyhood too, the
man (on attaining his youth) flares up due to ignorance when he fails to attain his desired
object and is overcome by grief.(28) His pride and anger growing with age, that seeker of
sensuous enjoyment enters into hostility with (other) pleasure-seeking men for his own
destruction. (29) Clinging to the unreal, the foolish Jiva of misguided intellect constantly
regards the body, made up of the five elements, as his own self or something belonging to
him.(30) For the sake of this body—which is a source of constant trouble to him and ever
follows him, bound by ties of ignorance and destiny—he performs actions (of various kinds),
tied to which he goes through repeated births and deaths.(31)lf under the influence’ of
sensually-minded people engaged in the pursuit of sexual enjoyment and the gratification
of the palate he delights in their ways again, he goes to hell as before. (32) One should never
cultivate the fellowship of those wicked fools, the toys of women, who are ever fidgety, have
identified themselves with the body and therefore deserve to be pitied, nay, by whose
company truthfulness, purity, compassion, control over the tongue, wisdom, prosperity,
modesty, fair name, forbearance, control of mind and the senses and good fortune are
blotted out of existence.(33-34) The infatuation and‘bondage which accrue to a man form
attachment to any other object are not so complete as those resulting from attachment to
women and from the fellowship of men fond of women. (35) At the sight of his own daughter
(Saraswat!) Brahma (the lord of created beings) was bewitched by her charms and
shamelessly ran after her in the form of a stag when she took the form of a hind. (86) Among
the creatures (gods, human beings and so on) begotten by KaSyapa and others, (who had
sprung from the loins of Marici and the other sages, the mind-born sons of Brahma), then,
what male is there, save the (divine) sage Narayana, whose mind is not distracted by the
Lord's Maya in the form of woman? (37) Behold the might of My Maya in the shape of woman,
who by the mere play of her eyebrows treads under foot even the conquerors of the four
quarters.(38)

ag न gate जातु योगस्य पारं परमारुरुक्षु: ।
मत्सेवया प्रतिलब्धात्मलाभो वदन्ति या निरयद्वारमस्य 1381
योपयाति हनैर्माया योषिद्देवविनिर्मिता । तामीक्षेतात्मनो मृत्युं qt: कूपमिवावृतम् ।४०॥
He who aspires to reach the culmination of Yoga (in the shape of God-Realization) or
who has realized his true nature by adoring Me should never cultivate the fellowship of young
