358 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 57
2 2:0 Ais 8 2:2 2228 2 e888 2d

oR ei iit er eta AA REAL CEL EL SSEAEAA ASAE EELS SEER ELSE LER HHI

स्यमन्तरकं दर्शयित्वा ज्ञातिभ्यो रज आत्मन: । विमृज्य मणिना भूयस्तस्मै प्रत्यर्पयत् प्रभु: (se

Sore stricken with feartohear the news of Satachanva having beenslain (by the Lord), Akrira
and Krtavarma, that had instigated Satadhanva (to murder Satrajitand take away his gem), went
out of Dwaraka (to escape His wrath). (29) Akrura having gone abroad, portentous phenomena
foreboding misfortune appeared before (the eyes of) the residents of Dwaraka and agonies,
(both) physical and mental, (nay,) those brought about by divine agencies and those caused by
other living beings overtook them again and again ever since.(30) So declare some historians
(Vaigampayana and others), forgetting what has been stated (by me) before, O dear Pariksit !
Isit (ever) possible that evil portents should be seenin the (very) home of the Lord whois the (one)
Abode ofascetics (that are capable of counteracting all evils by their holy presence)? (31) "(Once
upon a time) when Indra (the god of rain) did not pour seasonal showers (inhis kingdom), the ruler
of Kasi (the modem Varanasi) gave away with due ceremony to Swaphalka (the father of Akrura),
(recently) arrived (at his capital), his own daughter, Gandini (byname); thereupon Indra sent down
showers in the kingdom of Kasi. (32) Wherever stays the said Akriira, Swaphalka's son, who has
inherited his father's virtue, they say, Indra pours showers all round; neither calamities nor
epidemics appear there.” (33) Hearing the above-quoted words of the elders and though
recognizing that the absence of Akrira was not the only cause of the evil portents, Lord Srikrsna
(who is solicited by all men) had Akriira duly brought back (to Dwaraka) and spoke to him. (34)
The Lord, who was not only omniscient but knew the mind (ofall too), received him with respect,
admonished him and addressed sweet words to him and (then) smilingly said, so the tradition
goes:—{35) "That the glorious Syamantaka gem surely lay deposited with you by (the deceased)
Satadhanva was already known to us, O master of charities ! (36) Satrajit having left no male
issue, (it is but meet that) the sons of his daughter (Satyabhama) should offer oblations of water
and rice (to the spirit of the deceased) and, paying off his debts, should inherit the rest of his
property. (37) Yet let the gem—which cannot be easily maintained by others—remain with you,
strict in the observance of religious vows. My elder brother (Balarama), however, does not (fully)
trust me in the matter of the gem (and suspects that it has been got removed by me). (38)
(Therefore, pray,) showit (tous) and (thereby) bring relief to your relations (Balarama, Satyabhama
and Jambavati). (I know) your sacrificial performances are going on unceasingly these days on
altars of gold (thereby betraying the existence of the Syamantaka gem with you: for you could
not otherwise get so much gold).(39) Won over by gentle words in this way, Akrira (Swaphalka's
son) brought and delivered the gem, which was brilliant as the sun, wrapped in a piece of cloth.
(40) Having shown the Syamantaka to His kinsmen (Balarama and others) and rubbed off
through the gem the blame resting on Himself, the Lord then gave it back to Aknira. (41)

आख्यानं पठति श्रृणोत्यनुस्मरेद् वा दुष्कीर्तिं दुरितमपोह्य याति शान्तिम् ४२1

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्थां संहितायाँ ददामस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे स्यमन्तकोपाख्याने सप्तपञ्चाशत्तमोऽध्याय: 1491
He who simply reads, listens to or ponders this most blessed story replete with the
exploits of the all-powerful Lord Visnpu—a story which destroys all sin—gets rid of his evil
reputation and sin and attains (lasting) peace. (42)

Thus ends the fifty-seventh discourse, forming part of the story of Syamantaka,
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamisa-Samhita.

Statins
PII ee
