64 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

सि २२ २२२२ 9२२ २२२ २२२२ २२२ २ च् न्वि विसि वित् मा ttre

अन्येभ्योऽवान्तरदिशा: BU च मध्यत: । आर्यावर्तमुपद्रष्टे सदस्येभ्यस्तत:र परम् ।२२॥
तत्तश्चावभृथस्रानविधूतारोषकिल्बिष: । सरस्वत्यां ब्रह्मनद्यां रेजे व्यभ्र इवांशुमान् । २३॥
weg wef लब्ध्वा संज्ञानलक्षणम्।ऋषीणां मण्डले सोऽभूत् सप्तमो रामपूजित: । २४॥
जामदग्न्योऽपि भगवान् राम: कमललोचन: | आगामिन्यन्तरे राजन् वर्तयिष्यति वै बृहत् ।२५॥
आस्तेऽद्यापि महेन्धाद्रौ न्यस्तदण्ड: प्रशान्तधी: । उपगीयमानचरित: सिद्धगन्धर्वचारणै: 126 |
एवं भृगुषु विश्वात्मा भगव्रान् हरिरीश्वर: । अवतीर्य परं भारं भुवोऽहन् बहुशो नृपान् ie
Going to Mahismati (that had been) completely robbed of its splendour by the (sin of
the) murderers of a Brahmana (sage), Paragurama raised in the heart of the city a huge
mountain of their heads and with their blood created a ghastly river that inspired terror into
(the heartof) Brahmana-haters. Making the murder of his father an excuse—on the Ksatriyas
having taken to unrighteous ways—the mighty Paragurama rid the globe of the Ksatriyas
thrice seven times and (from their blood) created at Samantapajficaka (Kuruksetra) tanks
filled with blood instead of water, O protector of men! (17—19) Having brought (back) the
head of his father, Paragurama joined itto his trunk and, placing his body on (blades of) the
sacred Kusa grass, propitiated through (anumber of) sacrifices the (supreme) Deity, his own
Self, who represents all the gods in His person. (20) (At the end of these sacrifices) he
actually gave away the eastern quarter to the Hota, the southern to the Brahma, the western
to the Adhwaryu (and) the northern tothe Udgata. (21) He bestowed the intermediate corners
on the other priests, the central region on the sage Kasyapa, the Aryavarta (the tract of land
bounded on the north by the Himalayas and on the south by the Vindhya mountains}, on the
Upadrasta (the supervisor) and the region beyond (viz., that lying to the south of the Vindhya
range) on the Sadasyas (superintending priests). (22) And then, having washed offhis entire
sin (incurred by killing numberless Ksatriyas) through a bath, taken at the conclusion of the
Sacrifices in (the waters of) the Saraswati, a river representing the Vedas, he shone like the
cloudless sun. (23) Having regained his own body (which was now completely) spiritualized
(consisting as it did of consciousness alone), Jamadagni too, the adored of Paragurama,
became the seventh in the group of the seven seers (looking after the welfare of the
universe). (24) Indeed, Jamadagni’s son, the worshipful Parasurama too, who has eyes
beautiful as a pair of lotuses, will propagate the Vedas (as one of the seven seers), O king,
in the ensuing Manvantara. (25) He stays even to this day on Mount Mahendra, having
renounced (all forms of) violence and with a perfectly serene mind, his exploits being sung
by Siddhas, Gandharvas and Caranas. (26) Descending in the midst of the Bhrgus, the
almighty Lord Sti Hari, the Soul of the universe, thus slew several times kings (Ksatriyas)
who constituted a great burden on the (bosom of the) earth. (27)

Tiere: afr इव पावक: । तपसा क्षात्रमुत्सृज्य यो लेभे ब्रह्मवर्चसम् 2c!
विश्वापित्रस्यचैवासन्पुत्राएकाप्तंनृप।मघ्यपस्तुपथुच्छन्दामधुच्छन्दप्तएवते।रश
पुत्रं कृत्वा yw देवरातं च Sra आजीगर्तं सुतानाह ज्येष्ठ एष भ्रकल्प्यताम् ।३०॥
यो a हरिश्चन्द्रमखे विक्रीत: पुरुष: TY: | स्तुत्वा देवान् प्रजेशादीन् मुमुचे पाञबन्धनात् 1321
चो रातो देवयजने देवैर्गाधिषु तापस: | देवरात इति wena: Baa: स भार्गव: 1321
येपध्रुच्छन्द्रसोज्येष्ठा:कुशक्तंमेनिरैनत्तत्।क्यापत्त्तान्युंनि:कुष्द्वोप्तेच्छाभक्तदुर्जंना:।क्षक्ष।
सहोन्राचमध्रुच्छन्दा:सार्धंपच्छाठ्प्तातत:।यन्नोभवम्संजार्नीत्तेतस्मिंस्तिष्ठष्महेक्यम्।३४।
ज्येष्ठं मन्त्रदृशं चक्रुस्त्वामन्वञ्चो वयं स्म हि । विश्वामित्र: सुतानाह वीरवन्तो भविष्यथ ।

