Dis. 24] BOOK FIVE 535

PEKKA K EHEC KK HH TECRAKHEV HELA E MESES HH ee ee Ce oh Se OI Ee eee
ज्र्त्त

type, as well as with grand mansions of the lords of these regions, whose terraces are (ever)
crowded with pairs of Nagas and Asuras (demons), pigeons and parrots and Mainas. (9) The
gardens too (in those regions) surpassingly dim the glory of the celestial world by the
splendour, delighting the mind and senses (of the spectators), of (their) trees—whose
charming boughs are weighed down by bunches of flowers and fruits and lovely young
leaves and which are embraced by the body of creepers—(as well as) of their lakes etc., full
of limpid water and resorted to by various species of birds living singly as well as in pairs;
and (even so) they excel the heavenly world by the sweet and varied notes of birds that have
taken up their abode in the beds of lotuses andlilies, Kuvalayas, and Kalharas, blue and red,
lotuses and lotuses with a hundred petals (and soon) in the water of those lakes etc., shaken
by the leaping of fish—notes that bring a feast of joy (to the hearers) and are confused by
their uninterrupted sport. (10) There indeed, they say, no fear caused by divisions of time
such as day and night is observed (among the people since the sun and the moon do not
shine there and the denizens of those regions are very long-lived). (11) As a matter of fact,
in those regions the gems on the hoods of the foremost of the great serpents (inhabiting
them) drive away all darkness. (12) Nor indeed do anxieties and ailments, wrinkles, grey
hairs and old age (the root of all these) etc., paleness of the body, foul smell (coming from
the body), perspiration, fatigue and langour—these as well as the changes in age (too) do
not afflict those residing in these regions because of (their taking) miraculous herbs, saps,
elixirs, foods and drinks, baths and so on. (13) In fact, death from no cause except from the
might of the Lord going by the name of his discus (SudarSana) prevails against those blessed
souls. (14) (And) the moment that discus enters those regions the embryos (carried in the
womb) of the Asura women generally slip out (from the womb) in their earlier or later stages
of development through sheer fear (of the discus). (15)
अथातले मयपुत्रोऽसुरो बलो निवसति येन ह वा इह सृष्टा: षण्णवतिर्माया: काश्चनाद्यापि मायाविनो
धारयन्तियस्यचजृम्भमाणस्पफ्खतस्त्रच rn उदपद्यन्त स्वैरिण्य: कामिन्य: पुंश्चल्य इति या a
विलायनं Was पुरुषं रसेन हाटकाख्येन साधयित्वा स्वविलासावलोकनानुरागस्मितसंलापोपगूहनादिभि:
wat किल waka चस्मिन्नुपयुक्ते You ईश्वरोऽहं सिद्धोऽहमित्ययुतमहागजवबलमात्मानमभिमन्यमान:
Heald मदान्ध इव 2G |
Now, in (the region of) Atala, lives the demon Bala, son of Maya, by whom, indeed, they
say, were released ninety-six (varieties of) conjuring tricks, some of which conjurers practise
even today. From the mouth of this demon, even as he was yawning (once), sprang up three
groups of women, called Swairinis (those copulating with men of their class alone), Kaminis
(copulating with people of other classes too) and Pumscalis (the most fickle-minded among
the Kaminis). (All) these women render a man, entering this subterranean region, sexually
fit by (giving them) an elixir called Hataka and afford them sexual delight at will, so they say,
by their (peculiar) dalliances and sportive glances, love-begotten smiles, affectionate talks
and embraces etc. When that elixir is taken, a man begins to feel that he is all-powerful, that
he is all-perfect and, thinking himself as possessing the strength of ten thousand mighty
elephants, brags like one blinded by intoxication. (16)

सह मिथुनीभूत आस्ते यत: Wan सरित्प्रवरा हाटकी नाम भवयोर्वीर्येण aa चित्रभानुर्मातरिश्वना समिध्यमान
sista पिबति afta हाटकाख्यं सुवर्णं भूषणेनासुरेन्द्रावरोधेषु पुरुषा: सह पुरुषीभिर्धारयन्ति। १७।
Below that, in (the region of) Vitala, resides Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe),
(known by the name of) Hatakeswara, surrounded by troops of ghosts, forming His retinue,
and united with His (divine) Spouse (Goddess Parvati) under the name of Bhava (the Source

of the creation) for multiplying the creation of Brahma (the lord of creation). From Him has
issued the great river Hataki, charged with the energy of both Lord Bhava and Goddess
