Dis. 15] BOOK SEVEN 733
BPR RED Ee oo tot net tink Frink tintin & ttt tee & fo enirtrentrinin it frit ret intnintte Betr fr fr Reenter

grace, sweet voice and fragrance, | was most beloved of women and was constantly drunk
and excessively fond of women. (70) Once in a sacrificial session commenced by the gods,
parties of Gandharvas and Apsaras (celestial dancing girls) were invited by the creators of
the universe (Daksa, Mariciand others) for (the purpose of) singing the stories of SriHari. (71)
Coming to know of that invitation and surrounded by women, | too went there singing (profane
songs even on the way without permission). Taking it to be an offence on my part, the creators
of the universe cursed me by dint of their ascetic power, saying : "Shorn of (all) splendour,
attain you at-once the state (body) of a Sidra, since you have behaved disrespectfully
(towards us)." (72) At once | was born of a maid-servant and through service even in that life
to sages who were (all) expounders of the Vedas, and thanks to their fellowship | attained
the (present) state of a (mind-born) son of Brahma. (73) | have (thus) explained to you the
(course of) conduct prescribed for a married man whichis capable of destroying (all) sin, and
by (following) which a householder (too) can speedily attain the goal of recluses (viz., final
beatitude). (74)

चूयं नृलोके a भूरिभागा लोकं wm मुनयोऽभियन्ति ।

येषां गृहानावसतीति «mam गूढं परं ब्रह्म मनुष्यलिङ्गम् ।७५।

स वा Se wa Tees केवल्यनिर्वाणसुखानुभूति: |

fa: Ge a: खलु मातुलेय आत्मार्हणीयो विधिकृद् Tes v4!

न यस्य साक्षाद्भवपद्मजादिभी «aq धिया वस्तुतयोपवर्णितम् ।

मोनेन भक्त्योपशमेन पूजित: प्रसीदतामेष स सात्वतां पति: ioe!

Oh, exceedingly fortunate (far more fortunate than Prahrada) on earth (this world of
human beings) are you (the Pandavas and the Yadus), to whose residences flock from all
quarters sages sanctifying the (whole) world, inasmuch as the Supreme Brahma bodily stays
there disguised in the form of a human being. (75) This very Sri Krsna, your well-known
beloved friend and cousin (son of your maternal uncle Vasudeva), (nay,) your very self
(body), worthy of your adoration, obedient servant (ambassador and charioteer) and
preceptor (all in one), is Brahma, (that may be described as) the realization of absolute
(unconditioned) supreme Bliss and which is diligently sought after (even) by the great. (76)
May this Sri Krsna, the well-known Protector of devotees, be gracious to us—Sri Krsna,
whose essential character has not (so far) been depicted in its true colours with the help of
reason (even) by Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), Brhama the (lotus-born) and others,
and who is adored (by us) through silent meditation and enquiry, Devotion and control of
senses and so on (unlike you, who are on such intimate terms with Him and on whom He
lavishes His affection, a privilege which even Prahrada never enjoyed). (77)

SG उवाच
इति देवर्षिणा sikh fer भरतर्षभ: । पूजयामास सुप्रीत: कृष्णं च प्रेमविह्वल: i921
कृष्णपार्थात्रुपामन्त्य पूजित: wat yA: । श्रुत्वा कृष्णं परं war पार्थ: परमविस्मित: । ७९1
इति दाक्षायणीनां ते पृथग्वेशा: प्नकीर्तिंता:।देवासुंरमनुप्याद्या लोका AA चराचरा: । ८०।
युग्घष्टिरनारग्मवाट सन्मचारनिफ्या नाम पञ्चदगाऽध्याय 1१५॥

