180 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

ROM त्रज कौ को अज्क्यत्य */द्र{र्यं;छां!’द्रछांऽईं?‘ग्रंछांग्रेभ्रंघंग्रग्रष्टुंद्द्वश्चंछांश्रंच्चछांश्चेगैभं'ष्ट्रप्नच्चछांघ्रंप्र्व्यच्चग्र्व्यग्ने’ष्टुप्प्र्षाच्चगेचंञ्चं…र्श्वग्रद्मंप्क्लीनींर्व्यष्टैधैघेद्दाघ्रेद्मेघ्रंर्घमीं‘प्‘प्

stated by you (as consisting of a hundred years according to the measure* of time severally
obtaining in the three worlds). Now kindly tell me the life-span of other (higher) enlightened
beings (such as Brahma, Sanaka, Bhrgu and others), who live outside the three worlds (i.e.,
in the spheres beyond Indra's paradise). (16) Your holiness surely knows the course of the
all-powerful Time; for the wise can see the whole universe with their eye perfected through
Yoga (union with God). (17)

मैत्रेय उवाच

कृतं त्रेता द्वापरं च कलिश्चेति चतुर्युगम् । दिव्यैर्द्ददशभिर्वर्षै: सावधानं निरूपितम् eel
Maitreya replied : The four Yugas,viz., Krtayuga (Satyayuga), Treta, Dwapara and Kali

along with their Sandhya (the transitional period marking the beginning of each Yuga) and
Sandhyarnéa (the transitional period marking the end of each Yuga) have been declared as
consisting of 12,000 celestial years (or 43,20,000 human years). (18)

चत्वारि त्रीणि % ach कृतादिषु यथाक्रमम्। संख्यातानि सहस्राणि द्विगुणानि शतानि च । १९।

संध्यांशयोरन्तरेण य: काल: शतसंख्ययो: । तमेवाहुर्युगं तज्ञा यत्र धर्मो विधीयते 1201

धर्मश्चतुष्पान्मनुजान् कृते समनुवर्तते। स एवान्येष्ठधर्मेण व्येति पादेन वर्धता । २१।

त्रिलोक्या युगसाहस्रं बहिराब्रह्मणो दिनम्।तावत्येव fren तात यन्निमीलति विश्वसृक । २२।

निशावसान आरब्धो लोककल्पोऽनुवर्तते । arated भगवतो मनून् भुञ्जंश्चतुर्दश । २३।

स्वं स्वं कालं मनुर्भुङ्क्ते साधिकां ह्येकसप्ततिम्। मन्वन्तरेषु मनवस्तद्वदया ऋॠषय: सुरा: |

भवन्ति AI युगपत्सुरेशाश्चानु ये च AAW’!

एष दैनन्दि:: wi ब्राह्मस्रैलोक्यवर्तन: । तिर्यङ्नृपितृदेवानां सम्भवो aa कर्मभि: 1241

भन्वन्तरेषु भगवान् बिभ्रत्सत्त्वं स्वमूर्तिभि: | मन्वादिभिरिदं विश्वमवत्युदितपौरुष: 126

तमोमात्रामुपादाय प्रतिसंरुद्धविक्रम: । कालेनानुगताशेष आस्ते तूष्णीं दिनात्यये । २७।

तमेवान्वपिधीयन्ते लोका भूरादयस्त्रय: | निशायामनुवृत्तायां निर्मुक्तशाशिभास्करम् । २८।

त्रिलोक्यां दह्यमानायां ween सङ्कुर्षणाग्निना । यान्त्यूष्मणा महर्लोकाज्जनं भृग्वादयोऽर्दिता: 128 |

तावत्निभुवनं सद्य: कल्पान्तैधितसिन्धव: | प्लावयन्त्युत्कटायेपचण्डवातेरितोर्मय: 1301

अन्त: स तस्मिन् सलिल आस्तेऽनन्तासनो हरि: । योगनिद्रानिमीलाक्ष: स्तूयमानो जनालयै: 138 |

एवंविधैरहोरात्रै: कालगत्योपलक्षितै: | अपक्षितमिवास्यापि परमायुर्वय:शतम् 132 |

The Krtayuga and the succeeding Yugas severally consist of four, three, two and one

thousand celestial years plus twice as many hundred years (representing the Sandhya
and Sandhyaméga of each Yuga)+. (19) Those who are conversant with the divisions of time
call only the period intervening a Sandhya and the following SandhyarnSa, each of which
comprises of a hundred celestial years, as Yuga proper, for each of these Yugas a special

Dharma (code of virtue) is prescribed. (20) In the Krtayuga, Dharma (virtue) exists, for
men, complete in its four limbs (viz., austere penance, internal and external purity,
en

* Aday and night of the Pitrs (manes) consist of 30 days and nights of human beings. Hence the full life-span of Pitrs would
be reckoned at 3,000 years. Even so a day and night of the gads consist of two Ayanas or 360 human days and nights. Thus
the full life-span of the generality of gods would work up to 36,000 human years.

+ Thus a Satyayuga consists of 4,800 celestial years all told (4.000 years of Satyayuga proper and 800 years representing
the Sandhya and Sandhyarmsa combined). Similarly a Treta consists of 3.600, Dwapara of 2,400 and Kali of 1,200 celestial
years all told. In other words, a Kaliyuga consists of 4,32,000 human years, a Owapara of twice as many, i.e., 8,64,000 years,
a Treta of thrice as many or 12,96,000 years and a Satyayuga of four times as many or 17,28,000 years.
