Dis. 9 ] BOOK SIX 593

५.३..३.३..३.३.७.३.७..३.३..३.३ ee Re eR a aOR od es .३.३.३.७.७.७.३.३.७.३.३.३ RRR A Ae
000 OOOO Eee

शश्वत्कामवरेणांहस्तुरीयं ye: स्रिय: । रजोरूपेण तास्वंहो मासि मासि sega । ९ ।
द्रव्यभूयोवरेणापस्तुरीयं जगृहुर्मलम्। तासु बुद्ब्रुदफेनाभ्यां दृष्टं aaa झक्षिपन् ।१०॥ -

Sri Suka resumed : The said `1ऽ;वा028 had three heads (and the same number of
mouths), O Pariksit (adescendant of Bharata), by one of which he drank the sap of the Soma
plant (the common drink of the gods, usually offered in sacrifices), by another he drank
spirituous liquor and by the third of which he ate food; so we have heard. (1) Indeed with
(great) reverence he visibly and loudly proclaimed the oblations poured into the sacrificial
fire as the share meant for the gods (इदमिन्राय, इदमग्नवे and so on), since the gods were his
fathers (his father, Twasta, being one of them), O king! (2) But he secretly offered a share
(of the sacrificial oblations) to the demons (as well), as he (somehow) managed to convey
the same tothem even while pouring oblations into the sacred fire; for he had his sympathies
with the Asuras because of the affection his mother (Racana) bore to them. (3) Coming to
know of this behaviour on the part of Viswarpa, which amounted to an offence (breach of
faith) against the gods (whom he thus deprived of their rightful share) and a religious fraud,
and afraid of him (lest he might bring about the destruction of the gods one day), Indra (the
ruler of the gods) angrily cut off his heads with (great) expedition. (4) The head by which he
drank Soma turned out to be the (bird) Kapifjala (the francolin); that by which he drank wine
became the Kalavinka (the common sparrow) and that by which he ate food was converted
into the partridge. (5) Indra accepted with joined palms the sin of having assassinated a
Brahmana, even though he was powertul (enough to ward it off). (Remaining tainted with that
sin fora year,) Indra divided it at the end of a year into four parts and assigned them (in equal-
proportions) to the earth, water, trees and women with a view to self-purification in the eyes
of (other) beings. (6) The earth accepted a quarter (of the sin) along with the boon (the explicit
assurance in return) that a hollow dug into it would be filled (by itselfin due course). A barren
soil (which is prohibited for all sacred rites) is vividly seen on earth as an external sign of the
sin of killing a Brahmana. (7) The trees assimilated another quarter along with the boon
(clear understanding) that their chopped off parts would grow again (in due course by
themselves). The sin of killing a Brahmana is clearly perceived in them in the form of gum
(which should not, therefore, be eaten). (8) (Young) women took a third quarter of the sin
with the boon of constant sexual urge (capacity for sexual union even during gestation). The
sinis clearly perceived in them in the form of the menstrual discharge from month to month.
(Hence a woman is regarded as untouchable and unfit for sexual commerce during the
period of menstruation). (9) Water absorbed the fourthe quarter of the impurity with the boon
of an abundant supply of the material (from springs etc.). It is seen in the water in the form
of bubbles and foam (which are therefore regarded as impure and unfit for consumption);
anyone imbibing these imbibes the impurity. (10)

हतपुत्रस्ततस्त्वष्टा जुहावेन्द्रय ङात्रवे। इन्द्रशत्रो विवर्धस्व माचिरं जहि विद्विषम् ।११॥

अथान्वाहार्यपचनादुत्थितो घोरदर्शन: | कृतान्त इव लोकानां युगान्तसमये यथा ।१२॥

विघ्ठग्विवर्धमानॆ तमिषुमात्रॆ दिने fe दग्धैलप्रतीकाशं सन्ध्याभ्रानीकवर्चसम् ।१३॥
तप्तताम्रशिखाङ्मश्रुं मध्याह्नार्कोग्रलोचनम् | १४॥

देदीप्यमाने त्रिशिखे ye आरोप्य रोदसी । नृत्यन्तमुन्नदन्तं च चालयन्तं पदा महीम् । १५।

दरीगम्भीरवक्त्रेण पिबता च नभस्तलम्।लिहता freq ग्रसता भुवनत्रयम् । १६॥

महता रोद्रदंष्रेण जृम्भमाणं मुहुर्मुहु: | वित्रस्ता दुद्रुवुर्लोका वीक्ष्य सर्वे fea aa ey

Then Twasta whose son (ViSwarupa) had been slain (by Indra), poured oblations into
the sacred fire (by way of retaliation) in order to procure a mortal enemy for Indra, with the

(following) prayer: "O enemy of Indra, may you grow in power to an enormous degree and
kill your mighty foe (Indra) without delay." (11) Now from (the sacred fire called)

* This accounts for the practice, prevalent among the orthodox Hindus, of throwing away the bubbles from water before
drinking it; and itis therefore that the use of aerated water etc.. is prohibited in their eyes.
