Dis. 47 ] BOOK TEN 307

dofree totes errs eer teens peers teeny gees कक sore te iene

women, in any context in the course of an unreserved talk in an assembly of the ladies of the
city ? (42) (Others said,) Does He (ever) recall those nights, during that period (of His stay
in Vraja), when He sported with (us) His sweethearts in (the woodland of) Vrndavana,
charming with lilies and jasmines as well as with a full moon (bearing a spot resembling the
figure of a hare) in the ring of the Rasa dance accompanied by the sound of jingling anklets,
in the course of which His delightful stories were sung (by us)? (43) Will Sri Krsna (a scion
of Dasarha) ever come over here to infuse new life into us—tormented (as we are) with grief
occasioned by (separation from) Him—by (the soothing touch of) His (delightful) limbs even
as Indra (the god of rain) would refresh a forest (scorched with summer heat) by (sending)
clouds (of rain)? (44) (Still others said,) Wherefore should Sri Krsna come here now that He
has slain His enemies and attained sovereignty and, surrounded by all His kinsmen (the
Yadus), will feel (extremely) delighted when He has married (so many) princesses? (45)
(Some more wisely said,) What purpose of the high-souled Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Sri), who
has {all) His desires fulfilled and is (ever) perfect in His (own) Self, could be served by us,
dwelling in a forest, or (even) by other ladies (of royal descent)? (46) Even Pingala, a wanton
woman (of the legend), (once) spoke of hopelessness as the only road to supreme
happiness. Though we know (all) that, our hope to meet Sri Krsna is nevertheless hard to
overcome. (47) Who can dare withdraw his mind from the confidential talk of SriKrsna (who
is extolled by the most high, nay.) from whose person (bosom) Sri (the goddess of beauty
and prosperity) never gets down even though He does not long for Her ? (48) Alas | the river
(Yamuna), the mountain (Govardhana) and the forest lands (of Vrndavana), the cows and
the notes of flutes over there, hallowed (as they are) by Sri Krsna coupled with Sankarsana
(through association with Them), O mighty Uddhava, awaken again and again the memory
of Sri Krsna (the Son of Nanda, the cowherd chief) through His footprints, the abodes of (all)
charm and prosperity. Sureiy we cannot (therefore) forget Him. (49-50) How can we forget
Him—O Uddhava, we, whose mind has been captivated by His charming gait, pleasing
laughter and playful glances as well as by His honeyed words? (51) O Lord, O Spouse of
Rama, O Saviour of Vraja, O Reliever of (our) agony, O Protector of cows, lift (the village of)
Gokula out of the ocean of suffering, in which it lies plunged. (52)

श्रीरुक उवाच
ततस्ता: कृष्णसन्देहैर्व्यपेतविरहज्वरा: | उद्धवं पूजयाञ्चक्रुर्जजात्वाऽत्मानमधोक्षजम् । ५३।
उवास कतिचिन्मासान् गोपीनां विनुदञ्छुच: । कृष्णलीलाकथां गायन् रमयामास गोकुलम् | |
यावन्त्यहानि नन्दस्य ब्रजेऽवात्सीत् A BES: | व्रजोकसां क्षणप्रायाण्यासन् कृष्णस्य वार्तया । ५५1
सरिद्वनगिरिद्रोणीर्वीक्षन् कुसुमितान् ga कृष्णं संस्मारयन् रेमे हरिदासो व्रजोकसाम् । ५६1

Sri Suka went on ; The Gopis, whose agony of separation (from the Lord) was (now)
gone to a large extent, thanks to the messages received from Sri Krsna, (duly) worshipped
Uddhava, recognizing him to be Sri Krsna Himself (who is above sense- perception) and
(therefore) thelr very Self. (53) He stayed for some months (there) in order to drive away the
grief of the cowherd women. (Nay,) celebrating in song the story of the pastimes of SriKrsna,
he brought delight to (the entire village of) Gokula. (54) As long as the aforesaid Uddhava
lived in Nanda's Vraja the days passed like (so many) moments with the people of Vraja in
talks about Sri Krsna. (55) Eagerly observing the river, the woodlands and the dales as well
as the trees in blossom and vividly reminding the inhabitants of Vraja of Sri Krsna (by
questioning them about the pastimes connected with the various spots), Uddhava (the
servant of Sri Krsna) spent his time in delight. (56)

qamie गोपीनां कृष्णावेशात्मविकृवम्।उद्ध्व: परमप्रीतस्ता नमस्यन्निदं जगौ ius!
