340 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 53

BOTT ORORD SSIS SEO OIE rn em torsos sre gars int acerca

नानोपहारबलिभिर्वारमुख्या: FEE: । स्रगान्धवस्त्राभरणैर्दविनपल्यर स्वलङ्कृता: 142
गायन्तश्च स्तुवन्तश्च Weert वाद्यवाद्का: । परिवार्य ay जग्मु: सूतमागधवन्दिन: ॥४३॥
आसाद्य देवीसदनं धौतपादकराम्बुजा | उपस्पृश्य्जुचि: oe प्रविवेशाम्बिकान्तिकम् ।४४॥
at a प्रवयसो बालां विधिज्ञा विप्रयोषित: । भवानीं वन्दवाञ्चक्रुर्भवपत्नीं भवान्विताम् iy!
नमस्ये त्वाम्बिकेऽभीक्ष्णं स्वसन्तानयुतां शिवाम् । yard, पतिर्मे भगवान् कृष्णस्तदनुमोदताम् ।४६॥
अद्भिर्गन्धाक्षतैर्धूपैर्वास: . स्रङ्माल्यभूषणै: । नानोपहारबलिभि: प्रदीपावलिभि: पृथक् ise!
विप्रस्रिय: पतिमतीस्तथा तै: समपूजयत्। लवणापूपताम्बूलकण्ठसूत्रफलेक्षुभि: sel
तस्यै स्वियस्ता: seg: det बुयुजुराज्ञिष: । ताभ्यो देव्यै नमश्चक्रे det च जगृहे ae: ।४९॥
Thema west निश्चक्रामाम्विकागृहात्। sy पाणिना भृत्यां रत्नमुद्रोपश्ञोभिना ।५०॥

Thus spoke the citizens (to one another), bound as they were by ties of intense love (to
Rukmini). And, guarded by soldiers, the maiden (Rukmini) drove out of the gynaeceum to the
shrine of Goddess Ambika (Parvati). (9) Deeply contemplating on the lotus-feet of SriKrsna
(the Bestower of Liberation) with her speech (duly) controlled, (nay,) surrounded by her
female companions and protected by gallant soldiers of the king's personal guard, who were
(all) clad in armour and marched with uplifted weapons, she sallied out (of her chariot at the
outermost entrance of the temple) on foot alongwith her mother and other elderly ladies to
behold the feet—tender like soft leaves—of Goddess Parvati (the Consort of Lord Siva). Clay
tomtoms, conchs and large drums as well as clarionets and kettle-drums were sounded (as
she walked). (40-41) Surrounding the (royal) bride walked (with her) the foremost of dancing
girls in thousands with a variety of offerings and (other) articles of worship, Brahmana's wives
well adorned with garlands, sandal-paste, costumes and jewels, songsters singing songs
and (other) musicians, playing on musical instruments, as well as Stas (those versed in ancient
legends), Magadhas (bards) and Vandis (panegyrists), who glorified her (all along). (42-43)
Having washed her lotus-like hands and feet and sipped water on reaching the main shrine
of the goddess and, (thus) purified and tranquil of mind, she entered into the presence of
Goddess Ambika (the Divine Mother). (44) Elderly Brahmana ladies, conversant with the
ritual, helped the girl to extol Goddess Parvati, the Consort of Lord Siva, alongwith Siva (as
(follows):—(45) “I repeatedly bow to You, the Consort of Lord Siva, alongwith your children
(Lord Ganega and God Kartikeya). Let Lord Sri Krsna be my husband and may You give
countenance to it." (46) She (then) duly worshipped severally the Goddess as well as Her
family with water (for washing the hands and feet of the Goddess with and other such
purposes), sandal-paste, unbroken grains of rice, varieties of incense, raiment (of various
description), garlands, necklaces and other ornaments, edibles and other articles of worship
of various kinds and rows of lights (to be waved round the Goddess) and likewise worshipped
with due ceremony Brahmana matrons whose husbands were alive with the same articles
as well as with seasoned small round cakes of flour or meal, betel leaves (accompanied with
areca-nut parings, lime, catechu and cardamoms etc.), auspicious coloured thread for the
neck, fruits (of diverse kinds) and sugarcanes. (47-48) The aforesaid (Brahmana) ladies
gave her a part of the offerings made to the Goddess (as a token of Her grace) and added
their own blessings. The bride (for her part) bowed to them as well as to the Goddess and
accepted the offerings made. (49) Then, terminating her vow of silence, she came out of the
(main) shrine of Goddess Ambika (the Divine Mother), holding tightly by the hand a maid-
servant with her own hand brilliant with jewelled rings. (50)

a देवमायामिव वीरमोहिनीं सुमध्यमां कुण्डलमण्डिताननाम् ।

