42 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

कककजान्र EE HORE T REED ETER ERA EREEREESERR ESE ORELEEENEREN HE EREOE ELST ENE SEE

(even) as Virabhadra (who was no other than Lord Siva) slew Daksa* (a lord of created
beings). (10) On Sita (the Daughter of Janaka, the ruler of the Videha country, now known
as Tirhut in north Bihar) having been (forcibly) carried away in the forest during His absence
by Ravana (the vilest of the demons), even as (a sheep is snatched away by a wolf), the Lord,
who was (thus) disunited from His beloved Consort, wandered in that forest alongwith His
(younger) brother (Laksmana) like a forlorn creature, exemplifying in that way the (sad) plight
of those attached to women. (11) Having cremated (like a devoted son) Jatayu (the king of
vultures)—who had (all) his (stock of) Karma wiped out through his (heroic) action (in the
shape of a duel with the mighty Ravana) for His own sake (for the deliverance of His beloved
Spouse from the clutches of that tyrant)—the Lord slew the demon Kabandha (who had
stretched his arms to seize Him). (Then,) cultivating friendship with the monkeys (Sugriva,
Hanuman and others) and ascertaining through them, when Vali had beenkilled, the where-
abouts of His Darling, the Lord—who behaved as a human being even though His feet are
worshipped (even) by Brahma (the birthless creator) and Lord Siva (the Source of
creation)—marched with the forces of Sugriva (the ruler of the monkeys) to the seashore. (12)
The deity presiding over the ocean found the crocodiles and alligators in itagitated by a fierce
glance cast by Him in seeming anger (provoked by his failure to appear before the Lord in
spite of His waiting for him for three days without food and water), nay, its very roar silenced
through fear. (Therefore,) assuming a living form and taking articles of worship on his head,
he approached the Lord’s lotus-feet and spoke as follows:—{ 13) "Dull-witted as we are, O
infinite Lord, we ate unable to know You, the most ancient Person, the immutable supreme
Ruler of (all) the worlds. (Surely) You are (no other than) that Lord of Prakrti (consisting of
the three Gunas) from whose Sativika aspect sprang up hosts of divinities, from whose
Rajasika aspect, the (various) lords of created beings and from whose Tamasika aspect
appeared the lords of ghosts. (14) (Be pleased nowto) march (across the ocean) at Your will;
slay Ravana (the refuse of his father, the sage ViSrava), who (by his atrocities) makes the
three worlds weep; recover Your Spouse, O valiant One; (and) for the expansion of Your
fame construct here a bridge, reaching which monarchs intent on the conquest of the (four)
quarters may sing Your glory.” (15) Having (accordingly) constructed across the sea a bridge
with mountain-peaks of every description—full of trees the boughs of which were shaken by
the hands of monkey chiefs (who handled them)—the Lord, accompanied by armies (of
monkeys) led by Sugriva, Nila and Hanuman, entered under the guidance of Vibhisana (the
fortress of) Lanka, already burnt (by Hanuman in course of his quest for Sita). (16) With its
sports grounds, granaries, treasuries, doorways, city-gates, council-chambers, porticos and
pigeon-cots occupied by the army of monkey chiefs and its platforms, flags, jars of gold
(placed on both sides of its entrances) and crossroads being destroyed, the city shook like
a river churned by herds of elephants. (17) Perceiving this (calamity), Ravana (the lord of the
demons) deputed Nikumbha, Kumbha, Dhtimraksa, Durmukha, Surantaka, Narantaka and
others, his son (Meghanada), Prahasta, all his followers headed by Atikaya and Vikampana
and afterwards (his younger brother) Kumbhakarna (to meet the invading army).(18)
Accompanied by Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys), Laksmana (His own younger brother),
Hanuman (son of the wind-god), Gandhamadana, Nila, Prince Angada (Sugriva's nephew
and heir-apparent), Jambavan (the king of the bears), Panasa and others, Sf Rama (too)
marched against that army of the demons, which was difficult to penetrate, armed as it was
with cutlasses, Silas (sharp-pointed steel weapons), bows, Prasas (darts), Rstis (double-
edged swords), javelins, Tomaras (iron clubs) and swords. (19) Meeting in a single combat

* Vide IV.V. 24.
