Dis. 8 BOOK TWELVE 699

SRA AH AAA RAR A ERRATA IAR कन्र EAM BALA SABE BA EAA AEE ERR

(In order to bring about the sage’s downfall) he sent to the sage Gandharvas (heavenly
musicians) and Apsaras (celestial nymphs), Kama (the god of love), (the deities presiding
over) the vernal season and the south wind (lit., a breeze blowing from the Malaya mountain),
as well as greed (the pet child of Rajas) and pride. (16) They all repaired, O powerful sage !
to the hermitage of the sage along the northern slopes of the Himalayas, where flows the river
Puspabhadra and the rock named Citra stands. (17) The hallowed site of that hermitage was
adorned with sacred trees and creepers, crowded with families of holy Brahmana sages and
studded with sacred pools full of pellucid water. (18) The hermitage was full of the melodious
humming of (honey-) intoxicated bees and the notes of joyous cuckoos. It was marked with
the ecstasy of dance of blithesome peacocks and teemed with flocks of joyous birds. (19)
A breeze bearing the cool spray from waterfalls and embraced by (fragrant) flowers entered
the hermitage and (gently) played on it, kindling love (in the hearts of men). (20) There
appeared the vernal season with its evenings made charming by the rising moon and with
rows of young leaves and bunches of flowers, and trees and creepers in close embrace. (21)
The god of love, followed by Gandharvas with bands of musicians expert both in vocal and
instrumental music, and leading troops of Apsaras, was (also) seen (there) with bow and
arrows in hand. (22)

gent समुपासीनं ay: शक्रकिङ्करा: । मीलिताक्षॆ दुराधर्षं मूर्तिमन्तमिवानलम् 23!
ननृतुस्तस्य पुरत: स्रियोऽथो गायका जगु: | मृदङ्गवीणापणवैर्वाद्यं चक्रुर्मनोरमम् । २४॥
सन्दधेऽस्रं स्वधनुषि arm: पञ्चमुखं तदा। मधुर्मनो रजस्तोक इन्द्रभृत्या व्यकम्पयन् ।२५॥
IST: पुञ्जिकस्थल्या: कन्दुकै: स्तनगौरवात् yaar: केशविस्रंसितस्रज: 126 |
इतस्ततोभ्रमददृष्टेश्चलन्त्या अनुकन्दुकम्। वायुर्जहार तद्वास: Wed त्रुटितमेखलम् ize!
विससर्ज तदा amt मत्वा तं स्वजितं tad तत्राभवन्मोघमनीशस्य यथोद्यम: 1241
त इत्थमपकुर्वन्तो मुनेस्तत्तेजसा मुने। दह्यमाना निववृतु: प्रबोध्याहिमिवार्भका: 12¢1
इतीन्दरानुचरैर्ब्रह्मम् धर्षितोऽपि महामुनि: । यन्नागादहमो भावं न तच्चित्रं महत्सु हि ।३०॥
ae निस्तेजसं art सगणं भगवान् स्वराद। श्रुत्वानुभावं ब्रह्मर्षेर्विस्मयं समगात् परम् । ३१।

The servants (emissaries) of Indra saw the sage comfortably seated with closed eyes
near the sacred fire after pouring oblations into it and formidable like fire in human form. (23)
The damsels danced and the songsters sang, while other Gandharvas played charmingly
onclay tomtoms, lutes andsmall drums before him. (24) Then Love set the five-pointed arrow
to his bow; while Spring, Greed (the son of Rajas) and other servants of Indra tried to agitate
the sage’s mind. (25) (Even) as Pufjikasthall (the chief of the Apsaras) was sporting with (a
number of) balls (in front of the sage) and running after them, her (slender) waist getting very
unstable under the weight of her (full) breasts, wreaths of flowers dropping from her braid,
and eyes moving this way and that, the breeze blew away the fine garment (about her loins),
the waist-band (that held it fast} having given way. (26-27) Taking the sage as won by himself,
Love darted his shaft that (very) moment; but, liké the undertaking of an unlucky man, all his
effort proved futile against the sage. (28) Thus offending against the sage, but being
scorched by his glory, O sage, they withdrew like children that would run away after rousing
«asnake. (29) Though assailed as aforesaid by the servants of Indra, O Brahmana sage, the
great sage (Markandeya) did not fall a prey to egotism. It is indeed no matter for wonder in
the case of exalted souls. (30) The glorious Indra (the lord of paradise) was seized with great
wonder to see Love and his entourage cheerless and to hear (from their lips) of the glory of
