Dis. 72 ] BOOK TEN 423

SIGIR OO ttre Eo ES CEE REE ESE HEHE EN TA AAA

अथ द्विसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXIl
Jarasandha killed

SYR उवाच
एकदा तु सभामध्य आस्थितो मुनिभिर्वृत: । ब्राह्मणै: aadeauiqfes युधिष्ठिर: । १ ।
आचार्यै: कुलवृद्धैश्च ज्ञातिसम्बन्धिबान्धवै: vata चैतेषामाभाष्येदमुवाच ह । २ ।

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, one day, King Yudhisthira, while seated in his court
surrounded by sages, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas, his own brothers (Bhima and others),
preceptors, elders of the race, clansmen and relations as well as his kinsmen, addressed
Bhagavan Sri Krsna indeed within their hearing (as follows). (1-2)

युधिष्ठिर उवाच
क्रतुराजेन oes राजसूयेन पावनी: । यक्ष्ये विभूतीर्भवतस्तत् सम्पादय न: प्रभो । ३ ।
mange अविरतं परि a चरन्ति ध्यायन्त्यभद्रनशने geet गृणन्ति ।
विन्दन्ति ते कमलनाभ भवापवर्गमाज्ञासते ae a anf ga नान्ये । ४ |
aq tata भवतश्चरणारविन्दसेवानुभावमिह wag लोक एष: ।
a त्वां भजन्ति न भजन्त्युत वोभयेषां निष्ठां प्रदर्शय विभो कुरुसृञ्जयानाम् । ५ ।
न ब्रह्मण: स्वपरभेदमतिस्तव स्यात् सर्वात्मन: FART: स्वसुखानुभूते: |
`संसेवतां सुरतरोरिव ते yee: सेवानुरूपमुदयो न विपर्ययोऽत्र । ६ ।

King Yudhisthira submitted ; Govinda ! through the performance of the sovereign
sacrifice, Rajastiya, | intend to worship You as well as the gods, who are but Your part
manifestations. Kindly accomplish this desire of mine, O Lord ! (3) The pair of wooden
sandals You wear under Your lotus-like feet destroy all evil. Those holy persons who
constantly worship them, meditate on them and extol them obtain release from the bondage
of mundane existence. They get even worldly boons, if they seek forthem. Others, however,
do not get either. (4) O God of gods, let these men of the world directly perceive the glory
of worshipping Your lotus-like feet. Lord, kindly demonstrate to the Kuru and Srijaya chiefs
the destinies of those who worship and those who do not worship You. (5) Lord, You are the
Self ofall, the Supreme Brahma, being of the nature of self-enjoyment and looking on all with
an equal eye; the cognition of ‘Self and ‘not Self does not exist in You. Those who worship
You win Your favour evenas persons betaking themselves to the wishyielding tree gain their
object. The degree of success attained by them is commensurate with the amount of service
they have put forth and does not point to any perversity on Your part. (6)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
सम्यग् व्यवसितं राजन् भवता ङात्रुकर्शन । कल्याणी aa तॆ कीर्तिर्लोकाननु भविष्यति । ७ ।
saint पितृदेवानां सुहृदामपि न: प्रभो । सर्वेषामपि भूतानामीप्सित: क्रतुराडयम्। ८ ।
विजित्य नृपतीन् सर्वान् कृत्वा च जगतीं aT सम्भृत्य सर्वसम्भारानाहरस्व महाक्रतुम्। ९ |
एते ते भ्रातरो राजन् लोकपालांशसम्भवा: | जितोऽस्म्यात्मवता तेऽहं दुर्जयो योऽकृतात्मभि: ॥१०॥
न कश्चिन्पत्परं लोके तेजसा aaa fram । विभूतिभिर्वाभिभवेद् देवोऽपि किमु पार्थिव: 1221

The glorious Lord said : O King, your resolution is excellent. Through the performance
