Dis. 5] BOOK SEVEN 667

SORCRSOf S rt tit 2 IO eit retaii I nitt iain ninco earire ees e eerie

गृहमानीतमाहूय | Te दैत्ययाजका: । प्रशस्य इलक्ष्णया वाचा समपृच्छन्त सामभि: । ८ |
वत्स प्रह्राद भद्रं ते सत्यं कथय मा मृषा। बालानति कुतस्तुभ्यमेष बुद्धिविपर्यय: । ९ |
बुद्धिभेद: परकृत उताहो ते स्वतोऽभवत्। भण्यतां श्रोतुकामानां गुरूणां कुलनन्दन । १०॥

Summoning Prahrada, who had (now) been brought back (from the royal palace) to their
residence, the (family) priests of the Daityas praised him (by way of encouraging him and
winning his confidence) and duly questioned him in a soft language and in coaxing words (as
follows):—(8) Child Prahrada, may good betide you: speak the truth and do not tell a lie.
Whence this perversion of your intellect, which is not to be found in other boys (your
companions)? (9) (Please) tell (us) your teachers, anxious as we are to hear (the truth), O
delight of your race, whether the aberration of your mind has been brought about by others
or it has come about by itself. (10)

Yele उवाच
स्व: परश्चेत्यसद्ग्राह: पुंसां यन्मायया कृत: । विमोहितधियां दृष्टस्तस्मै भगवते नम: ।११॥
स यदानुव्रत: पुंसां पशुबुद्धिर्विभिद्यते। अन्य एष तथान्योऽहमिति भेदगतासती 1921
स एष आत्मा स्वपरेत्यबुद्धिभिर्दुरत्ययानुक्रमणो निरूप्यते ।
मुह्यन्तियद्व्रर्त्यनिबेटव्रादिनोव्रह्यादयोह्येपभिनत्तिमेपतिम्|१३।
यथा भ्राम्यत्ययो ब्रह्मन् स्वयमाकर्षसन्निधौ । तथा मे भिद्यते चेतश्चक्रपाणेर्यदृच्छया । १४॥
Prahrada replied : Hail to that almighty Lord, by whose Maya (delusive potency) has
been brought about the false notion that he is ons's own and he is another, which is
observed (only) in men whose mind is deluded (by that Maya). (11) When Heis propitious,
(it is then alone that) the false notion in men, embracing the distinction that "another is he
and another am |", which is generally found in beasts, is dispelled. (12) That (supreme)
Spirit Itself is described (by the wise) as one whose ways cannot be easily comprehended
by those that are labouring under the misapprehension that "he is my own and he is
another", and in whose quest even (great) exponents of the Veda such as Brahma (the
creator) get bewildered. Indeed it is He who is responsible for (changing my outlook and
making it universal). (13) (Just) as iron, O holy one, moves of itself (without any ostensible
Cause or purpose) in the vicinity of a magnet, so is my mind unaccountably drawn towards
Lord Visnu (who holds the discus, Sudargana, in one of His four hands). (14)

नारद उवाच
एतावद्बाह्मणायोक्त्वा विरराम महामति: । तं निर्भर्याथ कुपित: स दीनो राजसेवक: । १५॥
आनीयतामरे वेत्रमस्माकमयशस्कर: | HOG दुर्बुद्धेश्चतुर्थोऽस्योदितो दम: । १६॥

दैतेयचन्दनवने जातोऽयं कण्टकद्रुम: | यन्मूलोन्मूलपरशोर्विष्णोर्नालायितोऽर्भक: ।१७॥
इति तं विविधोपायेर्भीषयंस्तर्जनादिभि: । were) ग्राहयामास त्रिवर्गस्योपपादनम् । १८।

तत एनं Tien ज्ञातज्ञेयचतुष्टयम्। दैत्येनद्रे दर्शयामास मातृमृष्टमलङ्कृतम् | १९॥
पादयो:- पतितं बालं प्रतिनन्द्याशिषासुर: । परिषज्य चिरं deat परमामाप निर्वृतिम् । २०॥

आराप्याङ्कमवघ्राय मूर्धन्यश्रुकलाम्बुभि: | आसिञ्चन् विकसद्वक्त्रमिदमाह युधिष्ठिर 1221
Narada went on : Having said this much to the Brahmana (his preceptor), Prahrada (who
was possessed of a lofty mind) stopped speaking. Reprimanding him, that poor Brahmana
(who was a servant of the king) then angrily said :— (15) "O bring (me) a cane! The boy is
bringing us into disrepute. The fourth expedient of punishment (alone) has been prescribed
(in the Sastras) for this silly chap, who is proving to be the (very) ruin of his race. (16) He is
