Dis. 15] BOOK EIGHT ॥ 797

RRROHKEAERE EHTS ree eee ee PARE eee re ee ee es EN it tt it 8 oe Pet tt

रम्यामुपवनोद्यानै: श्रीमद्भिर्नन्दनादिभि: | कूजद्विहङ्गमिथुनैर्गायन्मत्तमधुव्रतै: 1221
प्रवालफलपुष्पोरुभारशाखामरद्रुमै: | हंससारसचक्राह्वकारण्डवकुलाकुला: ।
नलिन्यो aa क्रीडन्ति प्रमदा: सुरसेविता: 1231 7
आकादशगङ्गया देव्या gat परिखभूतया i प्राकारेणाग्निवर्णेन साट्टालेनोन्नतेन च ।१४॥
रुक्मपट्टकपाटैश्च द्वारे स्फटिकगोपुरै: । जुष्टां विभक्तप्रपथां विश्चकर्मविनिर्मिताम् । १५1
सभाचत्वररथ्याढ्यां विमानैर्न्यर्बुदैर्युताम् | शृङ्गाटकैर्मणिमयैर्वज्रविद्रुमवेदिभि: । १६॥
यत्र नित्यवयोरूपा: yam विरजवासस:। भ्राजन्ते रूपवन्नार्यो ह्यर्चिर्भिरिव aga: ee!
सुरस्रीकेशवबिभ्रष्टनवसौगन्धिकस्रजाम् । यत्रामोदमुपादाय art आवाति मारुत: ।१८॥
हेमजालाक्षनिर्गच्छद्धूमेनागुरुगन्धिना । पाण्डुरेण प्रतिच्छन्नमार्गे यान्ति सुरप्रिया: । १९
शिखण्डिपारावतभृङ्गनादितां वैमानिकस्त्रीकलगीतमङ्गलाम् 120 |

मृदङ्गशङ्खानकदुन्दुभिस्वनै: सतालवीणामुरज्टिवेणुभिं: ।
7:  सवाद्यैरुपदेवगीतकैर्मनोरमां स्वप्रभया जितप्रभाम् ।२१॥
यां न ब्रजन्त्यधर्मिष्ठा: Wen भूतद्गुह: Ber: | मानिन: कामिनो लुब्धा एभिर्हीना व्रजन्ति यत् । २२।
तां देवधानीं स वरूथिनीपतिर्बहि fe: समन्ताद् रुरुधे पृतन्यया ।
आचार्यदत्तं जलजं महास्वनं दध्मो प्रयुञ्जन्भयमिन्द्रयोषिताम् 1231
The city looked charming with (its) splendid orchards and gardens, such as Nandana,

crowded with warbling pairs of birds and black bees humming in intoxication, and full of
celestial trees whose boughs were overloaded with leaves, fruits and flowers. (In those
gardens) there were (anumber of) lotus ponds—abounding with swans, cranes, Cakrawakas
(ruddy geese) and Karandavas (ducks)—in which sport celestial women accompanied by
gods. (12-13) It is hemmed in by the worshipful heavenly Ganga (Mandakini) by way of a
moat, as well as by a high fortification wall of gold furnished with watch-towers (here and
there).(14) Built by Viswakarmé (the architect of heaven), it is provided with entrances (of
houses) whose doors are plated with gold, and with city gates made of crystal, and has its
roads well-arranged. (15) It is rich in public halls, quadrangles and streets and is full of
numberless mansions as well as of cross roads paved with gems and containing platforms
of diamonds and corals at the centre. (16) Lovely women of everlasting youth and unfading
beauty, cladin spotless raiment and decked with jewels, shine there as fires with flames. (17)
Through every pathway in that city blow breezes wafting the fragrance of fresh wreaths of
white water-lilies dropped from the locks of celestial ladies. (18) Celestial nymphs there walk
through paths covered with yellowish fume escaping through air-holes of gold and bearing
the fragrance of (burning) aloe-wood. (19) It is shaded (here and there) with canopies of
pearls, flags with staffs of gems and gold and balconies with smaller flags of various colours
fixed in them; is resonant with the noise of peacocks, pigeons and black bees and wears a
gala appearance due to the sweet songs of celestial ladies. (20) (Nay,) it delights the mind
of the people by the sound of clay tomtoms, conchs, drums and kettledrums; by(the musical
sound of) lutes, wooden tomtoms, Rstis (another musical instrument) and flutes accompa-
nied with (that of) cymbals, as well as by dances and the songs to the accompaniment of
musical instruments of demigods (Gandharvas and others); and outshines the deity
presiding over splendour byits brilliance. (21) Those who are extremely unrighteous, wicked,
fraudulent, proud, lustful and greedy and are enemies of created beings cannot enter it:

