Dis. 8] BOOK FIVE 465

CHCA AAT EE KEE AHH डक ज EKKO EEL HEAR AREER EBEHN ROHN ELER EEE ENE ek

His heart melted and was benumbed (as it were) under the pressure of exceptionally
increasing love for the Lord, occasioned by incessant worship of the Supreme Person carried
on in the aforesaid manner. The hair stood on their end all over his body as a result of intense
delight; his eyes were bedimmed by tears of love proceeding from an ardent longing (to meet
the Lord); and his consciousness being drowned in the deep lake of his heart, brimming over
with supreme felicity flowing from devotion—which was enriched by constant thought of
the feet of his beloved Lord, red as a lotus—he forgot even the worship that was being done
by him as aforesaid. (12) Having thus undertaken vows of propitiating the Lord and looking
very bright in his covering of deerskin and with his head of tawny, curly and matted hair wet
through ablutions performed thrice (everyday), he waited upon the all-effulgent Lord
Narayana (the Supreme Person)—as manifested in the orb of the rising sun—with hymns
addressed to the sun-god and prayed as follows :— (13)

परोरज: सवितुर्जातवेदो eae wh wad जजान।
सुरेतसाद: पुनराविश्य चष्टे ge गृध्राणं नृषद्रिङ्गिरामिम:। १४
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे भरतचरिते भगवत्परिचर्यायां सप्तमोऽध्याय:। ७1
The Light (constituting the very essence) of the sun-god, which lies beyond the material
plane (is made up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), dispenses the fruit of our
actions, it is the same Light which evolved this (phenomenal) universe by Its mere thought

and again, entering it (as Its Inner Controller), protects the Jiva, seeking Its protection, with
Its power of consciousness. We resort to that Light, which propels our intellect.* (14)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, forming part of the story of Emperor Bharata, dealing
(mainly) with the worship of the Lord, in Book Five of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CIs
oI Si ese

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
Bharata conceives an infatuation for a fawn and is reborn as a deer
श्रीरुक उवाच
एकदा तु महानद्यां कृताभिषेकनैयमिकावश्यको ब्रह्माक्षरमभिगृणानो मुहूर्तत्रयमुदकान्त उपविवेश | १।
तत्र तदा राजन् हरिणी पिपासया जलाशयाभ्याशमेकैवोपजगाम। २ । तया पेपीयमान उदके तावदेवाविदूरेण
नदतो मृगपतेरुन्नादो SHUTS उदपतत्। ३ ॥ तमुपश्रुत्य सा मृगवधू: प्रकृतिविक्लवा चकितनिरीक्षणा
सुतरामपि हरिभयाभिनिवेशव्यग्रहृदया पारिप्लवदृष्टिरगततृषा भयात् सहसैवोच्चक्राम । ४।

Sri Suka began again : Having bathed in the great river (Gandaki) and having finished
his routine of religious duties (both of an obligatory nature and those demanded by particular
occasions) as well as other unavoidable duties (such as easing nature), one day, Bharata
squatted on the bank of the river for three Muhdrtas (nearly two hours and a half), repeating
the sacred syllable Om. (1) Meanwhile, on that spot, O king, adeer approached the river bank

* This explains the meaning of the holy Gayatri-Mantra.
