230 SRIMADBHAGAVATA. ज [Dis, 21
cobweb, maintains it and then swallows it up. (19) Although (we know) it is not liked by You,
O Supreme Lord, that You should provide us (Your devotees) by dint of Your Maya (deluding
potency), with the pleasures of sense, let them come to us for our ultimate good (final
beatitude), when You have appeared before us in a form adorned with a splendid wreath of
Tulasi (basil) leaves—a form which looks finite through Maya. (20)

a त्वानुभूत्योपरतक्रियार्थं स्वमायया वर्तितलोकतन्त्रम् |
नमाम्यभीक्ष्ण नमनीयपादसरोजमल्पीयसि कामवर्षम् । २१॥

Although by virtue of Your Self-Realization You have ever ignored the consequences of
Your activity, You have conducted the affairs of the world by Your own Maya (sportive will)
and shower the desired blessings even on those who adore You with some interested
motive. | repeatedly bow to You, whose lotus-feet are worthy of reverence to all. (21)

ऋषिरुवाच
इत्यव्यलीकं प्रणुतोऽब्जनाभस्तमाबभाषे वचसामृतेन |
सुपर्णपक्षोपरि रोचमान: प्रेमस्मितोद्बीक्षणविभ्रमद्भ्रू: । २२।
Maitreya resumed: Sincerely extolledin the aforesaid words, Lord Visnu, (whose navel
is distinguished by a lotus and) who shone on the shoulders of Garuda, replied in accents

sweet as nectar, His eyebrows gracefully moving as He regarded the sage with a smile full
of affection. (22)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच

विदित्वा qa चैत्यं मे gta समयोजि ac यदर्थमात्मनियमैस्त्वयैवाहं समर्चित: 1231

न a जातु मृषैव स्यात्प्रजाध्यक्ष मदर्हणम्।भवद्विधेषतितरां मयि संगृभितात्मनाम् ies

प्रजापतिसुत: सम्राण्मनुर्विख्यातमङ्गल: | ब्रह्मावर्तं योऽधिवसन् शास्ति सप्तार्णवां महीम् । २५1

a चेह fax राजर्धिर्महिष्या हातरूपया। आयास्यति दिदृक्षुस्त्वां परश्चो धर्मकोविद: ।२६॥

आत्मजामसितापाङ्गीं व्रय:श्लीलगुणान्विताम् । मृगयन्तीं oft दास्यत्यनुरूपाय ते प्रभो Ro!

समाहितं ते हृदयं यत्रेमान् परिवत्सरान्। सा त्वां ब्रह्मन्नृपवधू: काममाशु भजिष्यति । २८॥

या त आत्मभृतं a नवधा प्रसविष्यति । def त्वदीये ॠषय आधास्यन्त्यञ्जसाऽऽत्मन: ।२९॥

त्वं च सम्यगनुष्ठायं निदेशं a उशात्तम: । मयि तीर्थीकृताशेषक्रियार्थो at प्रपत्स्यसे 1301

Ha दयां च जीवेषु दत्त्वा चाभयमात्मवान्। मय्यात्मानं सह जगद् द्रक्ष्यस्यात्मनि चापि माम् । ३१॥

Wee स्वांशकलया watt महामुने । तव क्षेत्रे देवहूत्यां प्रणेष्ये तत्त्वसंहिताम् ।३२॥
The Lord said : Having come to know what was in your mind, | have already arranged that
for which you have worshipped Me well through discipline of the mind and senses etc. (23)
Worship offered to Me by those who have solely fixed their mind on Me, particularly by people
like you, O lord of created beings, cannever goin vain. (24) (You know) Emperor Swayambhuva
Manu (son of Brahma), who is celebrated for his righteous acts, rules over the earth bounded

by the seven oceans, having his seatin Brahmavarta.* (25) Accompanied by his spouse, Queen
Satarupa, that royal sage, who knows the secret of Dharma (right conduct), will come to see you, `

* The territorial limits of Brahmavarta (the modem Kuruksetra) have been specified as below :—
“The tract lying between the two heavenly rivers, Saraswati and Drsadvati, and owing its existence to the gods, is called
Brahmavarta."
