648 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

SPARE ATE TETRA NE KEE HENLE मा मामा मा 99 CHOON THTOHHONT ERNE MONTERO त् न्न्

पूजादीनां प्रवाहार्थं महापर्वस्वथान्वहम्॥ क्षेत्रापणपुरग्रामान् दत्त्वा mearivarfiar । ५१।

प्रतिष्ठया सार्वभौमं सद्मना भुवनत्रयम् । पूजादिना ब्रह्मलोकं त्रिभिर्मत्साम्यतामियात् 1421

ama नैरपेक्ष्येण भक्तियोगेन विन्दति । भक्तियोगं स लभत एवं य: पूजयेत माम् ।५३।

a wet परैर्दत्तां हरेत सुरविप्रयो: । वृत्तिं स जायते विड्भुग् वर्षाणामयुतायुतम् । ५४॥

कर्तुश्च सारथेर्हेतोरनुमोदितुरेव च । कर्मणां भागिन: प्रेत्य भूयो भूयसि तत् फलम् । ५५1
इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे सप्तविंश्लोऽध्याय: 1201

Worshipping Me as aforesaid in accordance with the courses of worship taught in the
Vedas as also in the Tantras, a man secures at My hands success of the kind coveted by
him both here and hereafter. (49) One (who can afford to do so) should cause a strong
(enduring) house of worship to be built and, having duly installed My image (in it), should
(further) cause beautiful flower-gardens to be laid out and make a (formal) grant (in favour
of the temple) of fields, markets, towns or villages helpful for the (daily) worship, (occasional)
congregations (on sacred days) and festivals. Granting these for the regular (and uninterrupted)
conduct of worship etc., from day to day as well as on specially sacred days, one bids fair
to enjoy a fortune as great as Mine. (50-51) Through installation (of an image) one bids fair
to acquire sovereignty of the entire globe; by erecting a temple he is sure to attain dominion
of (all) the three worlds; through worship etc., one can hope to reach the realm of Brahma
and through all these three (combined) one can attain a state of equality with Me. (52) He
who worships Me as aforesaid secures union (in thought with Me) through Devotion and
through (such) course of disinterested Devotion one attains to Me alone. (53) He who takes
away the endowment made either by himself or by others in favour of (the image of) a deity or
a Brahmana continues for ten crores of years to be born as a creature living on ordure. (54)
Such a destiny (whether good or bad as depicted in verses 49 to 54 above) awaits hereafter
the agent as well as his assistant, prompter and supporter too, since each (of them) is a
partner in the act, and the reward or punishment is greater according as the action is more
dignified or atrocious.(55)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse in Book Eleven of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

cine tact.
IIE rors

अथाष्टाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVIII
The Highest Truth Discussed
श्रीभगवानुवाच ॥
परस्वभावकर्माणि न प्रशंसेन्न गर्हयेत्। विश्वमेकात्मकं पश्यन् प्रकृत्या पुरुषेण च । १ ।
परस्वभावकर्माणि य: प्रश्रंसति निन्दति । स आशु waa स्वार्थादसत्यभिनिवेशत: । २ ।
तैजसे निद्रयाऽऽपन्रे पिण्डस्थो नष्टचेतन: । मायां प्राप्नोति मृत्युं वा तद्वन्नानार्थदूक् पुमान् । ३ ।
fe भद्रे किमभद्रं वा द्वैतस्यावस्तुन: कियत्। वाचोदितं तदनृतं मनसा ध्यातमेव च । ४ ।
