284 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33

RR ER ERE EAA HAASE SHH AHE TRAE ELKOHEERLEERAIH ।.७.७.७.७.७.३.७. ७३ .३.३.३.३.६.३.६ ३३८3 .३-३3.३.०2.:३.३॥

अथ त्रयस्तरिशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXXill

Devahiti receives the light of wisdom and attains final beatitude
मेत्रेय उवाच

एवं निशम्य कपिलस्य वचो जनित्री सा कर्दमस्य दयिता किल देवहूति: |
विस्रस्तमोहपटला तमभिप्रणम्य apa तत्त्वविषयाङ्कितसिद्धिभूमिम् । १।

Maitreya resumed : When Devahiti, the beloved spouse of the sage Kardama and
mother of Lord Kapila, heard the foregoing discourse of the Lord, the veil of her ignorance
was torn asunder. She bowed to Him, the disseminator of the knowledge of Sankhya—which
throws light on the fundamental principles—and extolled him thus: (1)

अथाप्यजोऽन्त:सलिले झयानं भूतेन्द्रियार्थात्ममयं age |
गुणप्रवाहं ees eC स्ववं यज्जठराब्जजात: 121
स wa faye wan fart गुणप्रवाहेण विभक्तवीर्य: |
सर्गाद्यनीहोऽवितथाभिसन्धिरात्मेश्वरोऽतर्क्यसहस्रदशाक्ति: 1३1
aa yt A जठरेण नाथ wy नु यस्योदर एतदासीत्।
fag युगान्ते वटपत्र एक: शोते स्म मायाशिशुरङ्ध्रिपान: iv!
a fe: came पाप्मनां निदेशभाजां च fat faye
यथावतारास्तव सूकरादयस्तथायमप्यात्मपथोपलब्धये । ५1
यन्नामथैवश्रवणानुकीर्तनाद् यत्प्रह्वणाद्यत्स्मरणादपि क्वचित् |
श्वादोऽपि सद्य: सवनाय कल्पते wd: पुनस्ते wag alae!
अहो ad waist गरीयान् यज्जिह्वात्रे ada AR तुभ्यम्।
तेपुस्तपस्ते जुहुवु:३ सस्नुरार्या meen गृणन्ति ये ते ।७।
तं त्वामहं wa परं पुमांसं प्रत्यक्स्नोतस्यात्मनि संविभाव्यम्।
eam ध्वस्तगुणप्रवाहं at विष्णुं afte वेदगर्भम् ।८।

Devahiti said ; Brahma (the birthless creator) saw only with his mental eyes Your
(Cosmic) Body—pervaded by the (five) gross elements, the (ten) Indriyas, the (five) objects
of senses and the mind—from which proceeds the stream of the three Gunas (modes of
Prakrti), nay, which is the seed of all and lay manifest on the waters that had submerged the
universe at the time of Final Dissolution, and from the lotus of whose navel Brahma himself
had sprung.(2) Though actionless, You are of unfailing resolve and possessed of countless
inconceivable powers, and the Ruler of all the Jivas. That is why, having partitioned Your
energy according to the predominance of the three Gunas, it is You who carry on the
creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. (3) How, then, could it be that You
were bome in my womb—You into whose belly the whole of this universe disappears at the
time of universal dissolution and who at the endofa Kalpa rest all alone on a leaf of a banyan
tree in the form of an infant possessing inconceivable powers and sucking its great toe? (4)
You assume a personality for the extermination of the sinful and the exaltation, O Lord, of

those who abide by Your commands. Just as You appear in the semblance of a boar and
so on(for various other purposes), even so this descent of Yours is intended for showing (to
