Lis. 6 ] BOOK NINE 23
१4१

+ feeeretee #*:१-*%##&*# 88 .६ ४

तेषां पुरस्तादभवन्नार्यावर्ते gor qu । पञ्चविंशति: पश्चाच्च त्रयो मध्ये परेऽन्यत: । ५ |
a एकदाष्टकाश्राद्धे इक्ष्वाकु: सुतमादिशत्। मांसमानीयतां मेध्यं विकुक्षे wes माचिरम्। ६ ।
तथेति स वनं गत्वा मृगान् हत्वा क्रियार्हणान् । श्रान्तो बुभुक्षितो dk: eet चाददपस्मृति: । ७ |
ae face पित्रे a च तद्गुरु: ices: secre दुष्टमेतदकर्मकम्। |
ज्ञात्वा Ge तत् कर्म गुरुणाभिहितं नृप: । देशान्नि:सारयामास सुतं त्यक्तविधिं रुषा । ९ ।
स तु विप्रेण dae जापकेन समाचरन्।त्यक्त्वा कलेवरं योगी स तेनावाप यत् परम् ।१०॥
`पितर्युपरतेऽभ्येत्य विकुक्षि: पृथिवीमिमाम्।ज्ञासदीजे aff यज्ञै: seme इति विश्रुत: tee!
पुरञ्जयस्तस्य सुत इन्द्रवाह इतीरित: । ककुत्स्थ इति चाप्युक्त: श्रृणु नामानि कर्मभि: ।१२॥

Sri Suka resumed : Virdpa, Ketuman and Sambhu were the three sons of Ambarisa.
From (the loins of ) VirGipa (the eldest of the three) sprangup Prsadaswa and theiatter's son
was Rathitara. (1) Prayed to for progeny (to continue the thread of Rathitara's line), the
(celebrated) sage Angira (a mind-born son of Brahma) begot through the wife of Rathitara,
who was issueless, (a number of} sons invested with a glory resulting from the knowledge
of the Vedas. (2) Though born of the wife of Rathitara (and therefore deserving the family
name of Rathitaras), they actually became known as Angirasas (those sprung from the loins
of Angira). They were (recognized as) the foremost of the Rathitaras (the other progeny of
Rathitara and their posterity), being Brahmanas endowed with the (martial) qualities of
i<satriyas. (3) From the nostrils of Vaivaswata Manu, even while he was sneezing, sprang
up a son (called) Ikswaku. Of his hundred sons, Vikuksi, Nimi and Dandaka were the
eldest.(4) Of those (hundred sons) twenty-five became rulers (of small provinces) in the
eastern quarter of Aryavarta (the sacred” tract of land lying between the Vindhya range and
the Himalayas), O Pariksit, and as many (another twenty-five) in the western region; three
(eldest, named above) in the centre, and the rest in other parts (viz,. in the north and
south).(5) Once on the occasion of a Sraddha (a rite performed in honour of the departed
spirits of one's deceased relations) during the Astakas (the seventh, eighth, ninth and
thirteenth days of either fortnight of a lunar month) Ikswaku peremptorily said to his son
(Vikuksi), “Vikuksi, go and bring (me some) flesh fit for being offered to the manes. (Please)
do not tarry." (6) Saying "Be it so!" the heroic prince (Vikuksi) went to the forest and, having
killed (some) animals fit for (being used in) a religious rite (Sraddha ceremony),
thoughtlessly ate of (the flesh of) a hare (after roasting it), fatigued and hungry as he was.(7)
He gave the rest (of the flesh) to (his father) Ikswaku; but the latter's preceptor (the sage
Vasistha), when requested to sprinkle it with water (and thus consecrate it) said, "This has
been contaminated (by being eaten of beforehand) and is (thus) unfit for Sraddha." (8)
Having come to know of the aforesaid (sacrilegious) act of his son as told by his preceptor,
the king (Ikswaku) in an angry mood exiled from his country his son (Vikuksi), who had
abandoned the practice of good men. (9) The king then held a talk (on the ultimate Truth) with
the sage (Vasistha), his preceptor. As a result of such talk he became established in
Jfanayoga (the path of knowledge or realization of one's identity with the ultimate Reality)
and on casting off the body attained (oneness with) that which is higher than all. (10) His
father (Ikswaku) being (now) dead, Vikuksi returned (home) and, while ruling this earth,
propitiated Sri Hari through (a number of) sacrifices and became known as Sagada (the
devourer of a hare). (11) His son Purafijaya (the conqueror of a city), was nicknamed as
indravahs (the rider of Indra) and also as Kakutstha (one who rides the hump ofa bull). (Now)

