Dis. 2 ] .. EBOOKSIFREE 139

तेक्दिक्रितदि ता डो त् ककच त्य त् कौ व त्दा कक ENCE ERATE ERE CECE ER करिजी क HEE NEL EHE ST VHENHHTH TEAL NUMA व च

their armies again and again. (43) The birth and doings of the Lord, who is really birthless
and actionless, are only for the extirpation of the wrongdoers as well as for attracting people
towards Himself; otherwise (to say nothing of the Lord) what man that has transcended the
three Gunas(modes of Prakrti) would tie himself down to a (corporeal) body or pursue an
elaborate course of activity ? (44)Therefore, O friend, tell me the news about that Lord of
sacred renown who, though devoid of birth, has descended in the race of Yadu for the good
of all the guardians of the different spheres who sought refuge in Him, as well of such other
devotees as are (ever) at His beck and call. (45)

Thus ends the first discourse in Book Three,consisting of a dialogue between Vidura and
Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cB foot tit १५
Por iers

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
Uddhava recounts the childish sports of the Lord
MYR उवाच
sft भागवत: YB: क्षत्ना वार्तां प्रियाश्रयाम्। प्रतिवक्तुं न चोत्सेह steHvsaTRATAAA: । १ ।
a: पञ्चहायनो मात्रा प्रातराशाय याचित: । तन्नैच्छद्रचयन् यस्य सपर्यां बाललीलया । २ |

स wa सेवया Ta कालेन जरसं गत: । पृष्टो वार्तां प्रतिब्रूयाद्भर्तु: पादावनुस्मरन् 3 |
a मुहूर्तमभूत्तूष्णीं कृष्णाङ्धिसुधया wari dian भक्तियोगेन fora: are निर्वृत: i ४ |
पुलकोद्भिन्नसर्वाङ्गो मुञ्चन्मीलद्दुशा शुक्: । पूर्णार्थो लक्षितस्तेन स्नेहप्रसरसम्पुत: । ५ |
शनकैर्भगवल्लोकान्नृलोकं पुनरागत: । विमृज्य AS विदुरं प्रत्याहोद्ध्व उत्स्मयन् । ६ |
Sri Suka continued : Thus asked the news relating to his beloved इ Krsna, that great
devotee of the Lord, Uddhava, was put in mind of his lord and was too overwhelmed with
emotion to utter a word in reply. (1) While engaged in worshipping the Lord in his childish play
even as a body of five, Uddhava felt no inclination even to have his breakfast in spite of his
mother's call. (2) Having grown grey in His service by flux of time, how could he answer
Vidura's query regarding his lord, his thought being fixed on His feet ? (3) Completely
immersed in the nectar flowing from the (lotus-like) feet of Sri Krsna, and transported with
joy through intense devotion, he remained mute for nearly an hour. (4) The hair stood erect
all over his body and tears burst forth from his closed eyes. Seeing him overpowered with
a flood of affection, Vidura came to know that he had realized the object of his life. (5)
Uddhava slowly returned from the divine realm to this mortal world (body-consciousness)
and, wiping his eyes, replied to Vidura in a tone expressive of wonder (at the thought of the
Lord's exploits) :— (6)

SET उवाच
कृष्णद्युमणिनिम्लोचे wpe इ। किं नु न: कुशलं wal गतश्रीषु Weyer! ७ ।
दुर्भगो aa लोकोऽयं यदवो नितरामपि । ये संवसन्तो न विदुर्हरिं मीना इवोडुपम्। ८ |
SRR: GSS एकारामाश्च सात्वता:। सात्वतामृषभं ad भूतावासममंसत । ९ |
