716 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

Seeger Re Rarer eP Renin rire ner nt Be Be eB RR Re aa Rete te a wR HR AR PN

Jd Rrra etnivinina me tet t tf the ree ee

Prahrada, the beloved of the Lord, saw him lying on the (bare) ground on the sloping side
of the Sahyadri hills (now known as the Western Ghats), along the bank of the Kaveri, his
spotless (spiritual) glory concealed by his limbs covered (all over) with dust. (12-13) By his
conduct, appearance (gestures), speech and marks indicative of grade in society and stage
in life etc., people could not be sure about him that he was so and so, nor that he was not
so and so. (14) Having greeted and duly worshiped him and touching his feet with his head,
Prahrada (the demon king), the eminent devotee of the Lord, who was eager to know the truth
(about him), asked the following question:—(15) "You carry a robust body like one given to
exertion and enjoying the comforts of life. Wealth is the lot of only those who exert
themselves; while enjoymentin this world falls to the lot of the moneyed (alone). (And) indeed
the corporeal frame of (only) those who are given to luxuries grows fat, not otherwise. (16)
Lying supine as you do, O holy one ! you surely and-obviously own no riches, from which
alone follows (all enjoyment). (Pray,) tell us, if you deem fit, O Brahmana, the reason why
this body of yours is (so) corpulent; even though you indulge in no luxury. (17) Learned able-
bodied, endowed with a penetrating vision and possessing a wonderful and charming
eloquence, you remain lying down undisturbed while the world is (actively) doing work, even
though you perceive everything clearly. (18)
ARG Sara

स su दैत्यपतिना परिपृष्टो महामुनि: | स्मयमानस्तमभ्याह तद्बागमृतयन्तित: ।१९॥
Narada continued : Directly questioned thus by Prahrada (the ruler of the Daityas) and
captivated by his nectar like speech, the great ascetic (Lord Dattatreya) smilingly addressed
him (as follows). (19)
ब्राह्मण Sart

वेदेदमसुरश्रेष्ठ भवान् नन्वार्यसम्मत: । ईहोपरमयोर्नृणां पदान्यध्यात्मचक्षुषा 120 |
यस्य नारायणो gal भगवान्हृद्गत: सदा | भक्त्या केवलयाज्ञानं धुनोति ध्वान्तमर्कवत् 128 |
अथापि ब्रूमहे प्रश्नांस्तव राजन्यथाश्नुतम् । सम्भावनीयो हि भवानात्मन: शुद्धिमिच्छताम् । २२।
तृष्णया भववाहिन्या are: कामैरपूरया | कर्माणि कार्यमाणोऽहं नानायोनिषु चोजित: ।२३॥
aaa लोकमिमं प्रापित: कर्मभिरभ्रमन् । स्वर्गापवर्गयोर्द्वरुं तिरश्चां पुनरस्य WIR
अत्रापि दम्पतीनां च सुखायान्यापनुत्तये।कर्पाणिङ्कांतांदृष्टुम्यानिबृत्तोऽस्मिविर्ण्ययम्।शा।

The Brahmana replied : Esteemed as you are of the righteous (wise), O chief of the
demons, you undoubtedly know by your spiritual insight (all) this, viz., the consequences of
men's activity and cessation from activity. (20) Ever present in your heart by virtue of your
absolute (motiveless) devotion, the glorious (self-effulgent) Lord Narayana dispels your
ignorance even as the sun disperses (external) darkness. (21) Nevertheless, O king, we
(proceed to) answer your questions in the light of what we have heard (on the subject from
the wise). For, you deserve to be respected by (all) those seeking the purification of (their)
heart. (22) Impelled to actions by the stream of Avidity, which brings in its traina succession
of births (and deaths) and which cannot be sated with adequate enjoyments | have been
thrown into various wombs (states of existence). (23) Wandering about (from one species
of life to another) by force of actions | have been luckily endowed with this (human) body,
which leads to heaven (through virtuous deeds), to final beatitude (through spiritual
enlightenment or Devotion), to (birth in) the lower order of beings (through unrighteousness)
and to this (human) life again (through a mixed type of actions). (24) Perceiving in this life
too the frustration of married couples undertaking pursuits (of various kinds) for (securing)
happiness and driving away calamities, | have ceased from all activity. (25)
