Dis. 65 ] BOOK TEN 395

OM Te I TEE OHH ESSE eA NTT STEELS ATE PETAR LENA NT AEH I

fail the downfall of the man who does so, just as the Brahmana’s cow brought about the
downfall of this king (Nrga}, even though he was ignorant of the fact that he had misappro-
priated. (43) Having thus exhorted the people of Dwaraka, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the purifier
of all the worlds, retired to His palace. (44)

Thus ends the sixty-fourth discourse, entitled “ The story of Nrga,” in the latter
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

stinetoan
PII Sirs

अथ पञ्चषष्टितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXV

Baladeva triumphantly diverts the river Yamuna from its course

श्रीगुक उवाच
बलभद्र: कुरुश्रेष्ठ भगवान् रथमास्थित: । सुहृददिदृक्षुरुत्कण्ठ: प्रययौ नन्दगोकुलम्। १ ।
परिष्वक्तश्चिरोत्कण्टैर्गोपैर्गोपीभिरेव च । रामोऽभिवाद्य पितरावाकीर्भिरभिनन्दित: । २ ।
ft a: पाहि दाशार्हं सानुजो जगदीश्वर: । इत्यारोप्याङ्कमालिङ्ग्य नेत्रै: सिषिचतुर्जलै: । ३ ।

गोपवृद्धांश्च विधिवद् यविष्ठैरभिवन्दित: । यथावयो यथासख्यं यथासम्बन्धमात्मन: । ४ |
समुपेत्याथ गोपालान् हास्यहस्तग्रहादिभि: । विश्रान्तं सुखमासीनं omg: पर्युपागता: । ५ 1
पृष्टाश्चानामयं स्वेषु sere गिरा । कृष्णे कमलपत्राक्षे संन्यस्ताखिलराधस: । ६ |
कच्चिन्नो aera wa सर्वे कुशलमासते whe स्मरथ नो राम यूयं दारसुतान्विता: । ७ |

। दिष्ट्या केसो हत: पापो दिष्ट्या मुक्ता: Geert: | निहत्य निर्जित्य रिपून् दिष्ट्या St समाश्रिता: । ८ ।

Sri Suka began again : The blessed Lord Balarama, O ]8%९] among the Kurus ! who
eagerly jonged to see all friends and relations (in Vraja), drove (on one occasion from
Dwaraka) in his chariot to Gokula, ruled over by Nanda. (1) (On reaching there) He was
embraced by the cowherds as well as by the cowherdesses (of Vraja), who had been long
yearning (for His sight). Bowing to his (foster-) parents (mother Yasoda and Nanda), he was
cheered with blessings and addressed as follows:—(2) "O Bala (a scion of Dasarha), You
are the Lord of the universe; may You with Your younger Brother (Sri Krsna) protect us long!"
(Then) placing him on their lap and embracing him, they bathed him with tears (of joy) from
their eyes. (3) Bowing to the elderly among the Gopas with due ceremony, he was bowed
to by the younger ones. He duly met (all) the Gopas according to their age, intimacy and
relation to himself, cutting jokes with them, taking them by the hand and so on. When he had
reposed himself and was comfortably seated, (all) the Gopas gathered round him. They had
renounced all their worldly pleasures as well as the enjoyments of heaven, nay, Moksa (itself)
for the sake of Sri Krsna of fotus-like eyes. Inquired about their welfare, they made (similar)
inquiries about the health of their kinsmen (the Yadus) ina voice choked with emotion (as
follows:—)(4—6) "Balarama, are all our kith and kin (at Dwaraka) well ? You are now married
and are blessed with children, 0 Rama ! Do you remember us (now and then) ? (7) By good
luck the wicked Karnsa has been killed and our kinsmen luckily redeemed (from his tyranny).
Happily (enough) you have (either) killed or vanquished your enemies and taken shelter in
