Dis. 61] BOOK TEN 381
ate

Shoe tant feiririnieirie feee ce न १२२ nee eee ee nee ee ee LEME TEE CEES CELA AEE LEHR

अन्ये निर्भिन्नबाहूरुशिरसो रुधिरोक्षिता: । राजानो दुहुवुर्भीता बलेन परिघार्दिता: 13¢1
fred रुक्मिणि इयाले नाब्रवीत् साध्वसाधु वा । रुक्मिणीबलयो राजन् स्नेहभङ्गभयाद्धरि: । ३९।
wishes we Gi at रथं समारोप्य aq: कुशस्थलीम्।
रामादयो भोजकटाद् aie: सिद्धाखिलार्था मधुसूदनाश्रया: ।४०1
। रुक्मिवघो नामैकषष्टितमोऽध्याव: ।६१1

Though nursing deep-rooted animosity towards Sri Krsna and knowing such union as
contrary to (the principles of) piety, Rukmi (further) gave away his grand daughter, Rocana,
to his daughter's son, Aniruddha, with intent to gratify his (own) sister (Rukmini), bound as
he was by ties of affection (with her). (25) For that festive occasion, O king, Rukmini,
Balarama and Sri Krsna, Samba, Pradyumna and others drove to the city of Bhojakata. (26)
The aforesaid wedding being over, some haughty kings with the ruler of Kalinga (the modern
Utkala) at their head strongly said to Rukmi, “Thoroughly vanquish Balarama in a game of
dice. (27) Ignorant though he is of dice-playing, as a matter of fact, O king, great is his
addiction to it." Thus advised, Rukmi invited Bala and played at dice with him. (28) In that
game Balarama made a wager (successively) of one hundred, one thousand and ten
thousand gold coins; Rukmi, however, won them all. Showing his teeth on that occasion, the
ruler of Kalinga very loudly laughed at Balarama (the wielder of a plough), who (however)
resented it. (29) Then Rukmi made a bet of one lakh and Balarama won this time. Resorting
to cunningness, Rukmi (however) said, “| have won." (30) Like the sea on a full moon,
Balarama (the glorious one) was (now) agitated with anger. His eyes, which were naturally
red, began to glow with rage and he made a wager of ahundred million gold coins.(31)According
to the laws of gambling Balarama won that too. Taking recourse to deceit Rukmi (however)
said, "I have won. Let these umpires arbitrate on this point." (32) A voice from the heavens
thereupon declared that the bet was rightfully won by Balarama alone; Rukmliis surely telling
a lie when he says with his tongue alone (and not from his heart) that he has won. (33)
Ignoring that voice, Rukmi, who was instigated by wicked kings and prompted by his own
death, spoke mockingly to Balarama (as follows):—{34) "Being keepers of cows roaming in
woods, you do not know the game of dice. Kings (alone) play at dice and sport with arrows,
not men like you.” (35) Insulted thus by Rukmi and ridiculed by kings, Balarama flew into a
rage and, lifting up an iron bar, killed him (even) in that festive assembly. (36) Quickly seizing
the ruler of Kalinga, who had laughed at him with open teeth (and had now taken tohis heels),
(even) at the tenth step, Balarama smashed those teeth. (37) With their arms, thighs and
heads broken, and bathed in blood, when struck with the iron bar by Balarama, other kings
fled in terror. (38) For fear of estranging the goodwill of either Rukmini or Balarama, the Lord
did not make any favourable or adverse comment on His brother-in-law, Rukmi, having been
killed. (39) Having comfortably seated Aniruddha alongwith his newly-wedded wife in an
excellent chariot, Balarama and the other Dagarhas, who looked upon Sri Krsna (the Slayer
of Madhu) as their asylum, and who had all their objects accomplished; drove from Bhojakata
to Dwaraka. (40)

Thus ends the sixty-first discourse entitled “Rukmi killed (by Balarama) during the wedding of
Aniruddha", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

र्म्म
