818 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

RRR A AER HERE EEE HE ARE EAN ELE ER AAALAC HELL ARREST EEREREL ERA REE RAO HHA

Warriors not turning back and laying down their lives on the field of battle, O Brahmana sage,
are indeed easy to find, but not so those (liberal souls) who give away (their) fortune with
reverence when a worthy recipient comes.(9) It is (rather) graceful fora magnanimous and
compassionate soul that poverty should overtake him in consequence of (his) gratifying the
desire of (ordinary) petitioners, much more of knowers of Brahma like you. Hence | shall
(presently) confer the desired boon on this Brahmacaii. (10) Be he the selfsame Lord Visnu,
the Bestower of boons, whom you, well-versed in the Vedic rituals, worship with reverence
through Kratus (sacrificial performances in which the use of the Soma plant is indispensable
and Yajfias (those in which the Soma plant is not used), or be he an enemy, | shall bestow
on him the land sought for, O holy sage! (11) Evenif he unrighteously puts me—— even though
faultless—in bonds, yet | shall not hurt him, my enemy disguised as a Brahmana, and
(therefore) afraid (of me). (12) Ifheis really Lord Visnu (of excellent fame), he would not forfeit
his fairname (by playing me false) and might (as well) wrest the earth (from me, even if | were
loth to part with it) after killing me in battle; or, being slain by me, he mightlie in (eternal) sleep
(if he is an impostor). (13) ति
श्रारुक उवाच

एवमश्रद्धिते शिष्यमनादेशकरं गुरु:। शशाप दैवप्रहित: सत्यसन्धं मनस्विनम् । १४॥
ge पण्डितमान्यज्ञ: स्तब्धोऽस्यस्मदुपेक्षया | मच्छासनातिगो यस्त्वमचिराद् भ्रर्यसे श्रिय: ।१५॥
एवं शप्त: स्वगुरुणा vara चलितो महान्। वामनाय ददावेनामर्चित्वोदकपूर्वकम् । १६॥
विन्ध्यावलिस्तदाऽऽगत्य पत्नी जालकमालिनी | आनिन्ये aot हैममव्रनेजन्यपां भृतम् । १७॥
यजमान: स्वयं तस्य श्रीमत् पादयुगं मुदा। अवनिज्यावहन्मूर्धि तदपो विश्वपावनी: । १८|।
waste = दिबि देवतागणा गन्धर्वविद्याधरसिद्धचारणा: |
तत्कर्म सर्वेऽपि गृणन्त आर्जवं प्रसूनवर्षैर्ववृषुर्मुदान्विता: ।१९॥
नेदुर्मुहूर्दुन्दुभय: सहस्रशो गन्धर्वकिंपूरुषकिन्नरा जगु: ।
मनस्विनानेन कृतं सुदुष्करं विद्वानदाद् aq रिपवे जगत्त्रयम् । २०॥

Sri Suka continued: Impelled by Providence, Sukracarya (the preceptor) cursed (in the
following words) his high-minded disciple (Bali), who, being true to his promise, had thus
grown (apparently) irreverent (towards his preceptor) and refused to obey him:— (14) "You,
who have grown so arrogant as to violate my comman<, a highly conceited fool that you are,
will soon fallfrom your high position through disregard shown tous." (15) Thoughimprecated
in this way by his own teacher, the great soul did not deviate from truth and gifted the land
(asked by Him) to the divine Dwarf after (duly) worshipping Him and pouring water (from his
right palm in order to solemnize the gift). (16) His wife, Vindhyavali, who was adorned with
a pearl necklace, then came and brought a pitcher of gold, full of water to wash His feet
with.(17) The sacrificer (Bali) himself washed with delight the glorious feet of the Lord and
bore on his head that water, which was capable of consecrating the (whole) universe. (18)
Applauding that action (of Bali) as well as his guilelessness, all the hosts of gods in heaven,
as well as Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, Siddhas and C4ranas, full of joy, greeted the lord of
the demons at that time with showers of flowers, even though they were his enemies.(19)
Kettledrums were sounded in thousands again and again; while Gandharvas, Kirnpurusas
and Kinnaras sang (in the following strain):—"A most difficult task has been done by this
noble soul in that he has knowingly given away all the three worlds to his enemy." (20)

gq: खं fet द्यौर्विवरा: पयोधयस्तिर्यङ्नृदेवा ऋॠषयो यदासत 1221
