296 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

OEE EEN ERED ei EE ENE EWE TR BF PS आज्ज कक क आजकक # कक्तै यैदा विह्यं कौ जजये नेको त्यीकयै त्नं

ad तुं देवयजन इन्दोपेन्द्रादिभिर्भव: । सह भागं न लभतां देवैर्देवगणाधम: ।१८॥
निषिध्यमान स सदस्यमुख्यैर्दक्षो गिरित्राय विसृज्य शापम्।
amie विवृद्धमन्युर्जगाम are fe निकेतनम् ।१९॥

Maitreya continued : Having thus reviled Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount
Kailasa and) who remained unmoved without the least show of resistance, Daksa now
sipped a little water and indignantly proceeded to curse Him:—(17) “Yonder Bhava, the vilest
among the gods, shall no longer get a share in the sacrificial offerings along with the other
gods such as Indra (the lord of paradise), Upendra (Lord Visnu manifested in the form of a
dwart, so-called because of His being a younger brother of Indra) and so on.” (18) Having
pronounced this imprecation upon Lord Siva, though warned against such a course by the
leading members of the assembly, Daksa left the place, highly enraged, and returned to his
own abode, O scion of Kuru. (19)

विज्ञाय शापे गिरिशानुगाग्रणीर्नन्दीश्वरो रोषकषायदूषित: |

दक्षाय ज्ञापं विससर्ज दारुणं चे चान्वमोदंस्तदवाच्यतां द्विजा: ।२०॥
य एतन्मर्त्यमुद्दिश्य भगवत्यप्रतिद्रुहि | get: पृथग्दृष्टिस्तत्वतो विमुखो भवेत् 128!
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु सक्तो ग्राम्यसुखेच्छया । कर्मतन्त्र वितनुते वेदवादविपन्नधी: 1221
बुद्ध्या पराभिध्यायिन्या विस्मृतात्मगति: पशु: । स्रीकाम: सोऽस्त्वतितरां दक्षो बस्तमुखोऽचिरात् । २३ |
विद्याबुद्धिरविद्यायां कर्ममय्यामसौ जड:। dee ये चामुमनु हार्वावमानिनम् । २४॥
fr: श्रुताया: पुष्पिण्या मधुगन्धेन भूरिणा । मध्ना चोन्मथितात्मान: सम्मुह्यन्तु हरद्विष: । २५
सर्वभक्षा द्विजा ge धृतविद्यातपोव्रता: । वित्तदेहेन्द्रयारामा याचका विचरन्तिह 128 |

Having come to know of this execration, Nandigwara, the foremost of Lord Siva's
attendants, grew wild with rage and uttered a terrible curse on Daksa as well as on those
(other) Brahmanas who had countenanced his blasphemy. (20) "This fool, who makes much
of his mortal frame and bears enmity to the divine Siva—who has no vindictive spiritin Him—
and looks upon the body etc., (which is other than the self) as his own self, shall have his
face turned away from the Truth. (21) Attached to his home, the duties pertaining to which
involve the practice of many a self-deception, in the search for carnal pleasures, and
deprived of his judgment by attractive promises contained in the Vedas (such as the text-
promising eternal happiness to those who perform the sacrifice called Caturmasya” ), he
remains engaged in elaborate rituals. (22) With his mind ever contemplating on the son-self
as the self, Daksa has forgotten the true nature of his self andis (no better than) a brute. He
shall, therefore, be excessively fond of women and shall have his head forthwith changed
into that of a goat. (23) This stupid fellow—who regards ignorance in the form of addiction
to rituals as wisdom and has slighted Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe)—and those
who follow him shall be born in this world again and again. (24) With their mind bewildered
by the alluring, sweet and profuse odour (in the shape of the promises of happiness) emitted
by the flowery texts of the Vedas, these enemies of Hara (Lord Siva) shall remain infatuated
(for ever). (25) Eating anything and everything (making no distinction between what is worth
eating and whatis not) and devoted to learning, austerity and sacred vows only for the sake
of their livelihood, the Brahmanas shall wander in this world as beggars, finding delight only
in wealth, physical comforts and the gratification of their senses." (26)

“अक्षय्यं ह वै चातुर्मांस्ययाजिन: सुखं भवति ॥
