204 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15
HHHEHRELARENSEHHHORECEHER HERA HECHELEE He PH Kee cee eee Hee hawt et eee ey ee re eee hee
Sri Hari while the other divinities (of that realm) looked on, even though they were by far the
fittest persons (to be admitted into the Lord's presence), their eyes turned slightly red all of
a sudden on account of anger (that which follows in the wake of desire) at their longing to
see their most beloved Friend (Sri Hari) being thwarted, and they spoke (as follows). (31)
Ga Sg:

तस्मिन् प्रशान्तपुरुषे गतविग्रहे वां को वाऽऽत्मवत्कुहकयो: परिशाङ्कनीय: 1321

न ह्यन्तरं भगवतीह समस्तकुक्षावात्मानमात्मनि नभो नभसीव धीरा: |

पश्यन्ति aa gaat: सुरलिङ्घिनो: fe व्युत्पादितं ह्युदरभेदि भयं यतोऽस्य 1331

तद्बाममुष्य परमस्य बिकुण्ठंभर्तुं: कर्तुं प्नकृष्टपिह erate मन्दधीथ्याम् |

लोकानितो व्रजतमन्तरभावदृष्ट्या पापीयसस्त्रय इमे रिपवोऽस्य यत्र । ३४॥

The sages said : Of those who attain to and dwell in this realm as a result of their devoted
worship to the Lord and (naturally) imbibe the qualities (such as even-mindedness and so
on) of their Master, how is it that you two should have developed such a discordant’ |
disposition ? When the Lord is extremely pacific and has no quarrel with anybody, there can
be none deserving to be suspected by you here on your own analogy, who happen to be the
only impostors in this realm. (Since you are impostors yourselves, you scent foul play in
others.) (32) The enlightened inhabitants of this realm do not perceive their none-identity
with the Lord, who contains the whole universe in the cavity of His abdomen; on the other
hand, they find themselves comprised in the Lord even as the space in a jar is included in
the infinite space. What, then, has happened to you, who are invested with a divine body,
which has filled you with fear, caused by diversity, on His account ? (33) Therefore, we are
contemplating what should be a meet punishment for your sin, in order that good may be
eventually done to you, the two dull-witted servants of the Supreme Being, the Lord of

Vaikuntha. Since you smell diversity even here, go you hence to those spheres where the
three vicious propensities (lust, anger and greed) are one's (deadly) enemies. (34)

iil al at तं ब्रह्मदण्डमनिवारणमस्त्रपूगै: |
भूयादघोनि भगवद्भिरकारि दण्डो यो नौ Ra सुरहेलनमप्यशेषम् ।
मा वोऽनुतापकलया भगवत्स्मृतिघ्नो मोहो भवेदिह तु नौ व्रजतोरधोऽध: ।३६॥ ।
Hearing this utterance of the sages and knowing it to be a curse from the Brahmanas, ~
which could not be counteracted even by multitudes of missiles, the two attendants of Sri .
Hari, who is afraid of the Brahmanas even more than they, immediately prostrated `
themselves on the ground, clasping the sages’ feet with great humility. (35) “You have meted
out to us a punishment which is but meet for an offender; let it, therefore, take effect, so that
it may purge us in toto of the sin of showing disrespect to the Lord (by insulting you, who are
worthy of His respect). But if you feel the least compunction (in your heart) due to compassion
for us, let us not fall a prey to infatuation that may efface from our mind the memory of the
Lord when we descend into the lower regions." (36)

एवं wa waren: स्वानां faq सदतिक्रममार्यहृद्य: |
तस्मिन् wat परमहंसमहामुनीनामन्वेषणीयचरणौ चलयन् सहश्री: 1301
a त्वागतं प्रतिहतौपयिकं स्वपुम्भिस्तेऽचक्षताक्षविषयं स्वसमाधिभाग्यम् |
हंसश्रियोर्व्यजनयो: शिववायुलोलक्छुभ्रातपत्रशशिकेसरशीकराम्बुम् । ३८॥
