228 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

SOSA CHOIR ROI P OR BORIC ROE SORORITIES Bet i sre tte airs ren re stern sear

aT उवाच
इति fagiad तासां get योगेश्वरेश्वर: । प्रहस्य सद्यं गोपीरात्मारामोऽप्यरीरमत् ।४२॥
उदारहासद्विजकुन्ददीधितिर्व्यरोचतैणाङ्क इवोडुभिर्वृत: ॥४३॥
उपगीयमान इउद्गायन् वनितारातयूथप: | मालां fave वैजयन्तीं व्यचरन्मण्डयन् वनम् YY
नद्या: पुलिनमाविश्य गोपीभिर्हिमवालुकम्। रेमे तत्तरलानन्दकुमुदामोदवायुना ॥४५॥
बाहुप्रसारपरिरम्भकरालकोरुनीवीस्तनालभननर्मनखाग्रपातै: ।
श्ष्वेल्यावलोकहसितैर्व्रजसुन्दरीणामुत्तम्मयन् रतिपति रमयाञ्चकार ।४६॥
एवं भगवत: कृष्णाल्लब्धमाना महात्मन: | आत्मानं मेनिरे स्रीणां मानिन्योऽभ्यधिकं भुवि ive!

तासां तत् सौभगमदं वीक्ष्य मानं च केशव: । प्ररामाय प्रसादाय त्त्रैवान्तरधीयत vc
नामैकोनत्रिज्ञोऽघ्याय: 128 |

Sri Suka went on : Laughing heartily to hear the aforesaid pitiful prayer of the Gopis, Sri
Krsna (the Lord of all masters of Yoga), proceeded to delight them out of compassion, though
revelling in His own Self. (42) Surrounded by them—who had (now) gathered together with
their faces blooming atthe sight of their beloved Lord—Sri Krsna of noble deeds, whose teeth
bore the splendour of jasmine flowers during His charming smile, shone brightly like the full
moon (the disk of which is marked with dark spots resembling the spots of an antelope) in
the midst of stars. (43) Being praised in song (by the Gopis) and loudly singing (songs
Himself) and wearing a Vaijayanti garland (strung with flowers of five different colours), Sri
Krsna (wholed hundreds of bevies of lovely women) sauntered about gracing the forest (with
His bewitching presence). (44) Arriving in company with the Gopis at the bank of the river
(Yamuna)—covered with sands rendered cool by a breeze affording joy through its contact
with the waves of that river and charged with the fragrance of water-lilies (growing in the
river)—the Lord sported (with the Gopis there). (45) Inflaming the passion of the charming
women of Vraja by stretching His arms (in order to reach them from a distance), embracing
them, touching their hands, locks, thighs, skirt and bosom, cutting jokes with them and
digging the ends of His nails into their limbs, as well as by His sportful glances accompanied
with smiles, Sri Krsna brought delight to them. (46) Having thus received loving attention and
regard from the lofty-minded Lord Sri Krsna, the Gopis grew proud and thought themselves
superior to all women on earth.(47) Perceiving their vanity produced by such (rare) good-
luck as well as their pride, Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) disappeared
on that very spot with a view to curbing their pride once for all andin order to shower His
grace on them.(48)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse entitled “The Lord's Rasa-Play’” in the
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

म्मि
PISS prs
