Dis. 15] -* BOOK FOUR.» 359

SHER क सि OHA HERE AH HECK ELLE CHER HEM CHEER ATES ELE HEA COREE HEHEHE Re re ite केजो यी
SSS

thigh of the deceased emperor, wherefrom arose a dwarfish man, dark as a crow, with
exceptionally short limbs and particularly short arms and legs, large jaws, a flat nose,
blood-shot eyes and red hair. (43-44) To him, who was bent low and meek too, and who
said, "What shall! do ?" the Brahmanas said, "Sit down !" That is why, dear child, he came
to be known by the name of Nisada. (45) Since he took upon himself the terrible sins of
Vena even while being born, his progeny, the Naisadas, partook of his nature and took up
their abode on mountains and in woods. (46)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled “The Appearance of Nisada",forming part of the
Narrative of Prthu, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

seo Bat BTS
PISS iors

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV
Descent and coronation of king Prthu

मैत्रेय उवाच
aa तस्य पुनर्विप्रैरपुत्रस्य महीपते: | बाहुभ्यां मथ्यमानाभ्यां मिथुनं समपद्यत । १ ।
we दृष्टा मिथुनं जातमृषयो ब्रह्मवादिन: ae: परमसन्तुष्टा विदित्वा भगवत्कलाम् 2 |
Maitreya continued : Then again the (powerful) sages treated with rubbing the arms of
that (lifeless) king, who had no issue, and out of the electrifying friction there sprang a couple
(a male and a female person in perfect harmony of sex relation). (1) They farseeing sages,
who were enlightened with Vedic knowledge and were masters of divine doctrines, beheld
the couple born and comprehended that the two were part manifestations of the Supreme
Person divine, who is omnipotent and omniscient and possesses all prosperity and glory.
They became exceedingly happy to see the conjugate Persons and said : (2)

AIT HZ:
wa विष्णोर्भगवत: कला भुंबनपालिनी।इयखुलश्या:प्तम्पूति:पुंस्त्यस्पानपायिनी।इ।
अत्र तु प्रथमो राज्ञां पुमान् प्रथयिता aa: पृथुर्नाम महाराजो भविष्यति पृथुश्रवा: । ४ |
इयं च सुदती at गुणभूषणभूषणा। अर्चिर्नाम वरारोहा पृथुमेवावरुन्धती । ५ ।
Marte जातो लोकरिरक्षया।इयं च तत्परा हि श्रीरनुजज्ञेऽनपायिनी । ६ ।

The sages said : "This male person is a part manifestation of that aspect of the all-
pervading, all-knowing and all-powerful Lord divine, which protects the world. And this
female person is a ray of the Goddess of Beauty, Bliss and Prosperity and hence never gets
disunited from the Supreme Person. (3) Of this couple, the male person will be the first of
kings on earth, a mighty king to glorify the name and fame of every king in future, whose name
will be Prthu as the splendour of his name will shine far and wide. (4) This other is a shining
queen; her name is Arci, an embodied process of radiation: her finely set teeth are an
indication of her firmly formed faithful character; her ornaments are emblems of her golden
and gem-like virtues; her feelings and thoughts are ail ennobling as hers is an ascending
spirit. Itseems as if she would outshine her husband. (5) Thus an inalienable power and part
of the Supreme Lord divine called itself into being in space and time on earth to save the
inhabitants, the human beings, from sins and sufferings. This other, the queen devoted to
him, the goddess of inexhaustible wealth and prosperity, also came into the world as
