Dis. 73] BOOK TEN 429

RREER AREER H REL EET EEE EERE SE LEREL ERAT २२१२२२०२२ Ee HEHEHE RETR ARAL ELLE EE

SriSukaresumed : Parkksit, when the kings now released from captivity praisedin those
words the merciful Lord, who affords shelter to those who seek it, He replied to them in sweet
accents as below. (17)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अद्यप्रभूति वो भूपा मव्यात्मन्यखिलेश्वरे। ag जायते भक्तिर्बाढमाशंसितं तथा । १८॥
fen व्यवसितं gor भवन्त ऋतभाषिण: । श्रियैश्वर्यमदोन्नाहं wea उन्मादकं नॄणाम् ।१९॥

हैहयो नहुषो वेनो रावणो नरकोऽपरे। श्रीमदाद् भ्रंशिता: स्थानाद् देवदैत्यनरेश्वरा: 1201
भवन्त we विज्ञाय देहाद्युत्पाद्यमन्तवत्।मां यजन्तोऽध्वरैर्युक्ता: प्रजा धर्मेण रक्षथ 1281

सन्तन्वन्त: प्रजातन्तून् सुखं दु:खं भवाभवो । प्राप्तं omg a सेवन्तो मच्चित्ता विचरिष्यथ 1221
उदासीनाश्च देहादावात्मारामा धृतव्रता: । WETS मन: सम्यङ् मामन्ते ब्रह्म यास्यथ ।२३॥
Bhagavan Sri Krsna said : As desired by you, O kings, you will henceforth entertain
unwavering devotion to Me, the Universal Lord, who am the very Self of all. (18) You deserve
congratulation, O kings, for your resolution, and what you say is certainly true. For | have
seen that excess of pride of wealth and power makes people mad. (19) Haihaya, Nahusa,
Vena, Ravana, Narakasura and many other gods, demons and kings fell from their position
through the intoxication of wealth and power. (20) Know that the body and everything
connected with it is perishable inasmuch as it is subject to birth. Therefore, do not get
attached to them. Carefully controlling your mind and senses, worship Me through sacrifices
and protect your subjects in the righteous way. (21) Beget children for the continuity of the
family line, and not for enjoyment, and accepting with an equable mind, as a boon from Me,
whatever experiences come to your lot in the shape of birth and death, pleasure and pain,
gain and loss etc., live in the world with your mind devoted to Me. (22) Remain indifferent to
the body and everything connected therewith, take delight in the Self, practise Bhajana and
observe religious vows. Thus fixing your mind steadily on Me, you will inthe end attain to me,
the Supreme Spirit.(23) न
SR उवाच
इत्यादिश्य नृपान् कृष्णो भगवान् भुवनेश्वर: | तेषां न्ययुङ्क्त पुरुषान् feat मज्जनकर्मणि । २४।
सपर्यां कारयामास सहदेवेन भारत। नरदेवोचितैर्वस्रैर्भूषणै: स्रग्विलेपनै: 1241
भोजयित्वा वरान्नेन सुस्नातान् समल्ङ्कुतान्।भागश्च विविधैर्युक्तांस्ताम्बूलाद्यैर्नृपोचिते: 125 1
ते पूजिता मुकुन्देन राजानो मृष्टकुण्डला: | विरेजुर्मोचिता: छ्लेशात् प्रावृडन्ते यथा ग्रहा: 1201
रथान् Fara मणिकाञ्चनभूषितान्।प्रीणाव्य सूनृतैर्वाक्यै: स्वदेशान् प्रत्ययापयत् । २८।
A एवं मोचिता: Sed, कृष्णेन सुमहात्मना । ययुस्तमेव ध्यायन्त: कृतानि च जगत्पते: । २९॥
we: प्रकृतिभ्यस्ते महापुरुषचेष्टितम्। यथान्वश्ञासद् भगवांस्तथा चक्रुरतन्दिता: । ३०॥
उन्न Suka went on : Pariksit, thus instructing the kings, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the almighty
Lord of the universe, detailed a number of attendants, men and women, to give them a
bath.(24) He then got Sahadeva, son of Jarasandha, to honour the kings by offering them
wearing apparel, ornaments, garlands, sandal-paste and other things worthy of royal use.(25)
After they had finished their bath and adorned themselves they were entertained with
excellent dishes and other luxuries—such as betel leaves etc.,—worthy of kings. (26) Thus
treated with due honour by Bhagavan Sri Krsna and rid of their suffering, the kings shone with
their brilliant ear-rings like the planets at the end of the rainy season. (27) The Lord then
provided them all with chariots adorned with jewels and gold and drawn by good horses,
