450 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

SOO OIRO ER ero ion Wy tt sort 6 ककजा छत्ता STH OOK LL ज EN EET NH HEHEHE HEH CEH HALEVHH ELE Re

thus by Sri Krsna, the Preceptor of the three worlds and the Source of the Vedas, Uddhava
betook himself to Badarikagrama and adored Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) through abstract
meditation. (32) When Vidura heard from Uddhava an account of the praiseworthy doings
of Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, who had assumed a human semblance as a mere sport,
as well as of the way in which He had quitted His body—which was such as strengthened
the resolution of the resolute and was something too hard to accomplish for those who have
a feeble mind and therefore as good as beasts—and when, O Pariksit (the foremost among
the Kurus), he remembered that Sti Krsna had thought of him (at the time of His departure),
he was overwhelmed with emotion and wept on parting with that great devotee of the
Lord. (38—35) Leaving the bank of the Kalindi (Yamuna), the enlightened Vidura (the
foremost of the Bharatas) reached in a few days the bank of the heavenly river (Ganga),
where the sage Maitreya (the son of Mitra) was. (36)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

st र्यं Sth
PII Siege

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४
The sage Maitreya describes the process of creation
in reply to Vidura's question
SR उवाच

क्षत्तोपसृत्याच्युतभावशुद्ध: - पप्रच्छ सौशील्यगुणाभितॄप्त: । १ ।
Sri Suka continued : Vidura, the foremost of the Kurus, whose heart was purified by
devotion to the imperishable Lord Sri Krsna, approached the sage Maitreya of fathomless
wisdom, who was staying at Haridwara (the gateway of the celestial river, Ganga, so-called

because the river descends into the plains at this point) and, gratified by his good disposition
and other virtues, asked him (the following question): (1)

fagt उवाच
सुखाय कर्माणि करोति लोको न a: Ge वान्यदुपारमं वा ।
fata भूयस्तत we ga यदत्र Ge भगवान् वदेन्न: । २ ।
जनस्य कृष्णाद्दिमुखस्य दैवादधर्मशीलस्य सुदु:खितस्य |
अनुग्रहायेहे चरन्ति ow भूतानि भव्यानि जनार्दनस्य । ३ |
तत्साधुवर्यादिश वर्त्म शं a: संराधितो भगवान् a पुंसाम्।
ge fem यच्छति भक्तिपूते ज्ञाने सतत्त्वाधिगमं पुराणम् । ४ ।
करोति कर्माणि कृतावतारो यान्यात्मतन्त्रो भगवांस्त्यधीशा: |
यथा ससर्जाग्र se निरीह: संस्थाप्य of wrt विधत्ते । ५ ।
