210 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

SERNA ERROR REESE BCE EWEN EEE WEEE EERIE ISTE SEIT Sa ger न्न्

wa owen gf स्थित्युत्पत्त्यन्तहेतव: । रजसोत्पद्यते विश्वमन्योन्यं वित्निधंजग्'म्यात्|२२|
रजसा चोदिता मेघा वर्षन्त्यम्बूनि सर्वत: । प्रजास्तैरेव सिद्ध्यन्ति wis: किं करिष्यति । २३

The glorious Lord said : A creature is born by force of Karma (past actions), by force
of Karma alone it dies and by force of Karma itself it experiences pleasure and pain, is
subjected to fear and enjoys security. (13) If there is any supreme Ruler who dispenses the
fruit of others’ actions, he too rewards or punishes (only) the doer; indeed he has no authority
over him who does nothing. (14) What have created beings—that follow each the course of
its own actionin this world—to do with Indra, whois incapable of altering the course of actions
performed by men according to their individual nature ? (15) Indeed every created being is
a slave to its nature and follows its own natural disposition. The whole of this creation
including gods, demons and human beings has its being in nature. (16) By force of Karma
a soul takes (diverse) corporeal forms, high and low, and quits them. Karma alone appears
in the form of an enemy, a friend or a neutral and Karma alone is our preceptor and almighty
Lord. (17) Therefore, sticking to the Varna (grade of society) and Asrama (stage in life)
determined by one's own nature and performing one’s own duty, one should duly worship
Karma alone. In fact, that alone is one's deity by which one lives happily (in this world). (18)
Depending on a particular deity, he who worships another does not derive happiness from
the latter any more than an unchaste woman who loves a paramour. (19) A Brahmana should
live by (the teaching and exposition of) the Vedas: a Ksatriya, by protecting the land; a
Vaigya, by (what is known as) Varta; while a Sidra should live by service (rendered) to the
(aforesaid) twice-born classes. (20) Varta is said to be of four kinds, viz., agriculture,
commerce and rearing the bovine race, usury being the fourth. Out of these (four) the cow
has ever been our (only) means of subsistence. (21) (The qualities of) Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas are severally the cause of the continuance, appearance and dissolution (of the
universe); it is through (the quality of) Rajas that by mutual union (of the male and female)
is brought forth the heterogenous universe. (22) Impelled by Rajas, clouds shower water all
round. It is through such water that living beings achieve their purpose (of getting their food
etc.). What has Mahendra to do with this ? (23)

न न: पुरो जनपदा न ग्रामा न गृहा वयम्। नित्यं वनौकसस्तात वनजैलनिवासिन: ।२४॥
TH Wa ब्राह्मणानामद्रेश्चारभ्यतां मख: । य इन्द्रयागसम्भारास्तैरयं साध्यतां मख: ।२५॥
पच्यन्तां विविधा: पाका: सूपान्ता: पायसादय: | संचावापूपशष्कुल्व: सर्वदोहश्च गृह्यताम् । २६॥
wa: सम्यग् ब्राह्मणैर्व्रह्मवादिभि: | अन्नं बहुविधं तेभ्यो देयं वो धेनुदक्षिणा: 1201
अन्येभ्वश्चाश्चचाण्डालपतितेभ्यो यथार्हत: । यवसं च गवां दत्वा गिरये दीयतां बलि: 1221
स्वलङ्कृता भुक्तवन्त: स्वनुलिप्ता: सुवासस:। प्रदक्षिणं च कुरुत गोविप्रानलपर्वतान् ।२९॥
एतन्मम मतं तात क्रियतां ale रोचते । अवं गोव्राह्मणाद्रीणां मह्यं च दयितो me: 1301
There are neither cities nor territories nor villages nor houses inour possession. We have
ever had our abode in the forest, dwelling as we do in woodlands and on mountains. (24)
Therefore, let there be instituted a worship of cows. the Brahmanas and the mountain
(Govardhana). Let this worship be accomplished with those very materials that have been
brought together for the worship of Indra. (25) Let different varieties of cooked food from rice
boiled in milk with sugar down to boiled pulses including Samyava (a kind of porridge made
of wheat flour with milk and ghee etc.), buns and cakes be prepared and let all the milk be
collected. (26) Let fires be properly fed with offerings by Brahmanas who are expositors of

the Vedas. Let excellent food be offered to them by you as well as cows and sacrificial
fees.(27) Food should also be given to (all) others down to the dog, the pariah and the fallen

