Dis. 9 ] BOOK FOUR 333°

Sh ne oh he of init fh trininine tik S & & Siinniininin 6h @ annie hh tor torte tee eer esr ert
व्यात्र्त्त ज Sr Se

bondage of) birth and death—for other purposes and hanker after the pleasures of sense,

enjoyable by the body (which is no better than a corpse), and which can be had by living
beings even in hell. (9) The bliss which is enjoyed by embodied souls through meditation on
Your lotus-feet or by hearing the stories of Your devotees is not found even in Brahma (the
Absolute), who is blissful in essence. How, then, could it be enjoyed by them (the gods) who
are hurled from the aerial cars smashed by the sword of Death? (10) May | enjoy the intimate
fellowship, O infinite Lord, of exalted souls, possessed of a pure heart and constantly
devoted to You, so that! may easily cross the terrible ocean of metempsychosis, full of great
perils, drunk with the nectar of Your (delectable) virtues and stories. (11) They who have
cultivated the close fellowship of men whose heart is captivated with the fragrance of Your
lotus-feet, O Lord with a lotus sprung from Your navel, think no more of their mortal frame,
which is extremely dear to all, much less of those connected with it, viz., their sons, relations,
house, wealth and wife. (12) O birthless one, | know only Your grossest (cosmic) form, full
of animals, trees and mountains, birds, reptiles, gods and demons and human beings,
consisting of gross and subtle elements and brought about by many causes, such as the
Mahat-tattva and so on; | am not aware, O supreme Lord, of Your other Self, higher than this,
which transcends all speech. (13) You are the same as the Supreme Person, who at the end
of a cycle (at the time of universal dissolution) reposes with none beside Him save Lord
Ananta (the serpent-god Sesa) and on his very coil, withdrawing all this universe into His
belly and with His eyes turned inward (buried as He is in Yoganidra or the sleep of Samadhi).

Nay, itis in the seed-vessel of the gold lotus representing all the fourteen worlds and sprung
from the ocean of Your navel that the shining Brahma (the creator) appears | | bow to that
Lord. (14) You are the eternally free, all-pure and all-knowing Self, the immutable, most
ancient Person, possessed of all divine attributes and the Controller of the three Gunas
(modes of Prakrti). Witnessing by Your unobstructed vision the different states of the mind,
You appear as Visnu (the Deity presiding over sacrifices) for the preservation (of the
universe) and are altogether distinct (from the Jiva). (15) It is in You that the manifold
potencies of opposite character, namely, Vidya (the power of omniscience) and so on,
constantly appear in unbroken succession. You are no other than Brahma (the Absolute),
the cause of the universe, indivisible, without beginning or end, purely blissful in character
and changeless. | take refuge in You. (16) In the eyes of him who constantly adores You as
an embodiment of supreme bliss (seeking no other object), Your lotus-feet, O Lord, are the
only true blessing as compared with other boons (sovereignty etc.). Nevertheless, my
Master, just as a cow that has recently calved nourishes its calf (by its milk) and protects it
(against wolves etc.,) You foster even wretched (interested) devotees like us, impatient as
You (always) are to shower Your grace on them. (17)

मेत्रेय उवाच

अथाभिष्टुत एवं वै सत्संकल्पेन धीमता । भृत्यानुरक्तो भगवान् प्रतिनन्द्येदमब्रवीत् । १८|
Maitreya resumed : Thus extolled by that sagacious child, who cherished a noble
purpose, the Lord, whois fond of His devotees, cheerfully received its praises and spoke as

follows. (18)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
वेदाहं ते व्यवसितं ge राजन्यबालक।।तत्प्रयच्छामि we a दुरापमपि सुव्रत । १९
नान्यैरधिष्ठितं भद्र यद्भ्राजिष्णु ध्रुवक्षिति । यत्र गअहर्क्षताराणां ज्योतिषां चक्रमाहितम् । २०॥
मेढ्यां गोचक्रवत्स्थास्नुं परस्तात्कल्पवासिनाम् | धर्मोऽग्नि: कश्यप: शुक्रो मुनयो ये वनौकस: |
चरन्ति दक्षिणीकृत्य Waa यत्सतारका: 1221
