690 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9°

आदा त्ती AH OEE AA EH OOM eee Kee ALES eC KKK STN THe Cee He OOH eee eee eens een ङ ween

ae यज्जनो wad विदधीत मानं तच्चात्मने प्रतिमुखस्य यथा मुखश्री: 1281
wenee विगतविक्कव save सर्वात्मना महि गृणामि यथामनीषम् ।
नीचोऽजया गुणविसर्गमनुप्रविष्ट: gaa a fe पुमाननुवर्णितेन ie
wa wat विधिकरास्तव सत्त्वधाम्नो ब्रह्मादयो वयमिवेश न चोद्विजन्त: |
ama भूतय उतात्मसुखाय una विक्रीडितं भगवतो रुचिरावतारै: 1231
तद् यच्छ मन्युमसुरश्च हतस्त्वयाद्य मोदेत साधुरपि वृश्चिकसर्पहत्या ।
लोकाश्च निर्वृतिमिता: प्रतियन्ति at रूपं नृसिंह विभवयाय जना: स्मरन्ति ies
नाहं बिभेम्यजित तेऽतिभयानकास्यजिह्वार्कनेत्रभ्रुकुटीरभसोग्रदंष्टात् |
आन्त्रस्नज: क्षतजकेसरशङ्कुकर्णान्निर्हादभीतदिगिभादरिभिन्नखाग्रात् | 8 |
ag: स्वकर्मभिसशत्तम asefinggs प्रीतोऽपवर्गशारणं gaa कदा नु ।१६॥
यस्मात् प्रियाप्रियवियोगसयोगजन्पशोकाग्निना सकलयोनिषु ददह्यमान: |
Sud तदपि दु:खमतद्धियाहं भूमन्भ्रमामि ae मे तव दास्ययोगम् ।१७॥
सोऽहं प्रियस्य सुहृद: परदेवताया लीलाकथास्तव नृसिंह विरिञ्चगीता: |
अञ्जस्तितर्म्यनुगृणन्गुणविप्रमुक्तो दुर्गाणि ते पदयुगालयहंससङ्ग: ।१८।
तप्तस्य तत्प्रतिविधिर्य इहाञ्जसेष्टस्तावद् fad तनुभृतां त्वदुपेक्षितानाम् ।१९।
यस्मिन्यतो af येन च यस्य यस्माद् यस्मै यथा aga यस्त्वपर: परो वा ।
wa: करोति विकरोति पृथक्स्वभाव: सञ्चोदितस्तदखिलं भवत: स्वरूपम् । २०॥

Prahrada said : Hosts of gods headed by Brahma, contemplative souls and wise men
too, whose mind is solely devoted to virtue, knowledge and asceticism (products of Sattva)
have not succeeded even to this day in propitiating Sri Hari through streams of prayers
abounding in many qualities. Can He (then) be pleased with me, born of a ferocious race
(the demonrace)? (8) Wealth, pedigree, comeliness of form, asceticism, learning, keenness
of the senses, splendour, glory, bodily strength, self-endeavour, intelligence and Yoga
(concentration of mind or breath-control), | believe, are not sufficient for the propitiation of
the Supreme Person. For (on the other hand) the Lord was pleased with the leader of aherd
of (wild) elephants* through (mere) Devotion. (9) | account a pariah (a Candala)—who has
dedicated his mind, speech, actions, wealth and life (itself) to Him—far worthier than a
Brahmana that has turned away his face from (the worship of) the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu
(who has a lotus sprung from His navel), though endowed with the (aforesaid) twelve
attributes. (For) the former redeems his (whole) race, but not the Brahmana, (who is) full of
inordinate pride (and therefore unable to redeem his own soul, much less his race). (10) This
all-merciful Lord (present before me), who is sated with the realization of His own (blissful)
nature, does not covet honour (worship) at the hands of His ignorant devotee for His own
sake. (But He does it for the sake of the devotee himself.) For whatever honour the devotee
offers to the almighty Lord redounds upon himself, (even) as the decoration of one's face is
(immediately) reflected on its image (in a mirror, which cannot be decorated otherwise). (11)

* Vide Disourses II to IV of Book Eight.
