Dis. 16 ] BOOK SIX 625

Serre Int oe ee ee Ee OEE NEE ERE ae teEg eres Ome Rees ere

Hail to You, the mighty Controller of the senses, having the cosmos for Your body. (20)
May He protect us—He, who is absolute Consciousness without any name or form and
lies beyond the cause and the effect, and who shines all by Himself when speech (as well
as the other Indriyas) along with the mind has withdrawn, failing to reach (comprehend)
Him. (21) Hail to You, the selfsame Brahma, in which this universe stays and (finally) gets
merged (at the time of universal dissolution) and from which it evolves (at the time of
creation) and that pervades all even as earth pervades all earthen vessels. (22) | bow to
that (transcendent Reality) which the organs of action fail to reach (through their active
power) and the mind, intellect and the senses of perception fail to comprehend (by their
cognitive faculty), and which extends (both) within and without like ether. (23) The body,
Indriyas (senses of perception and organs of action), vital airs, mind andintellect—these are
stirred into activity only when charged with a ray of the (aforesaid all-conscious) Spirit (viz.,
during the waking and dream states alone) and not at other times (during deep sleep,
unconsciousness etc., when they are not so charged), even as iron which is not fully heated
cannot burn. (How, then, can they reach or comprehend that which is the source of their
activity ?) And it is Brahma alone that acquires the name of ‘subject’ (the conscious Self)
during the waking and other states (Hence there is no question even of the Jiva's knowing
the supreme Brahma). (24) Hail to Lord Sankarsana (the Supreme Person), denoted by
(the mystical syllable) OM and possessed of supreme might, the Spouse of Goddess
Mahalaksmi (who embodies in Herself the highest glory and fortune) ! Hail to You, O
supreme Ruler of the universe, whose lotus-like feet are fondly and softly kneaded by all
the hosts of principal devotees with the lotus-buds of their hands. (25)
श्रीगुक उवाच

भक्तायैतां प्रपन्नाय विद्यामादिश्य ane: | ययावङ्निरसा साकं धाम स्वायम्भुवं प्रभो । २६॥

चित्रकेतुस्तु विद्यां at यथा नारदभ्राषिताम्। arama सप्नाहमब्भक्ष: सुसमाहित: 1201

ततश्च सप्तरात्रान्ते विद्यया धार्यमाणया । विद्याधराधिपत्यं a लेभेऽप्रतिहतं Fa: । २८।

aa: कतिपयाहोभिर्विद्ययेद्ध्मनोगति: | जगाम देवदेवस्य ङोषस्य चरणान्तिकम् 1281

प्रसन्नवक्त्रारणलोचनं वृतं ददर्श सिद्धेश्वरमण्डले: प्रभुम् ।३०॥

तद्दर्शनध्वस्तसमस्तकिल्बिष: स्वच्छामलान्त:करणोऽभ्ययान्मुनि: |
प्रवृद्धभक्त्या प्रणयाश्रुलोचन: प्रहष्टरोमानमदादिपूरुषम् । ३१1
स उत्तमह्लोकपदाब्जविष्टरं प्रेमाश्रुलेशैरुपमेहयन्मुहु: ।

प्रेमोपरुद्धाखिलवर्णनिर्गमो Aad प्रसमीडितुं चिरम् 1३२॥

a: समाधाय wt मनीषया awe एतत्प्रतिलब्धवागसौ |
नि सं ~ ६ न re

Sri Suka went on : Having taught the aforesaid prayer to that devotee (Citraketu), who
had sought his protection, the (celestial) sage Narada returned with the sage Angira, O king
(Pariksit), to the abode of Brahma (the self-born); while Emperor Citraketu duly repeated that
prayer taught by Narada for seven days (consecutively) with perfect concentration of mind,
subsisting on (mere) water. (26-27) And then at the expiry of seven nights the aforesaid king
attained the permanent lordship of the Vidyadharas (the artists of heaven) by virtue of the
prayer being (still) repeated (by him). (28) After that, in a few days, the course of his mind
having been (fully) the illumined through (the repetition of) the same prayer, Citraketu betook
himself to the (holy) feet of Lord Sesa (the serpent-god), the adored (even) of the gods. (29)
