Dis. 21] BOOK ELEVEN 613

ESSUPEAES ATTEN COMERS MERA T TATE T TPNH ARENT ANAM eno ONES AANA सा श्वक क

anon-entity. The (very) purpose (of life) of such an (almost) unconscious and dead man is
consequently defeated. (21) Due to excessive attachment (and longing) for the pleasures of
sense he who knows neither himself nor the Supreme lives in vain (as if unconscious) like
a tree and breathes like the bellows (is as good as dead for all practical purposes). (22)
फलश्रुतिरियं नॄणां न श्रेयो रोचनं परम्।श्रेयोविवक्षया प्रोक्तं यथा भैषज्यरोचनम् । २३।
sama fe कामेषु प्राणेषु स्वजनेषु च। आसतक्तमनसो val आत्मनोऽनर्थहेतुषु । २४॥
न तानविदुष: end भ्राम्यतो वृजिनाध्वनि । कथं युञ्ज्यात् पुनस्तेषु तांस्तमो feat बुध: ।२५॥
एवं व्यवसितं केचिदविज्ञाय कुबुद्धय: । फलश्रुतिं कुसुमितां न वेदज्ञा वदन्ति हि ।२६॥
कामिन: BoM Gan: पुष्पेषु फलबुद्धय: | अग्निमुग्धा धूमतान्ता: स्वं लोकं न विदन्ति A 12001
aa मामङ्ग जानन्ति हृदिस्थं य इदं यत: । उक्थशस्त्रा ह्यसुतृपो यथा नीहारचक्षुष: 1201
a मे मतमविज्ञाय परोक्षं विषयात्मका: । हिंसायां यदि राग: ee यज्ञ एव न चोदना 1221
हिंसाविहारा ह्यालब्धै: पशुभि: स्वसुखेच्छया । यजन्ते देवता यज्ञै: पितृभूतपतीन् wer: 1301
Such a promise of reward (in the shape of heaven etc., contained in the Vedas as for
example’ स्वर्गकापो यजेत`-- One aspiring for heaven should perform sacrifices like Agwamedha)
does not point out the way to blessedness butis put forward only in order to create in the mind
of men (externally inclined) a taste (for ritual acts) as introductory to an exposition of final
beatitude, even as before administering a (dose of) bitter medicine (to a stubborn child) a
Sweet promise is made (by parents just in order to prevail upon the child to take the dose).(23)
Indeed mortals naturally have their mind attached to objects of desire (such as wealth, cattle
etc.), to their life (including their sense-organs, Vitality, virility etc.), as well as to their own
people (progeny, wife and so on), even though they are (ultimately) sources of misery
(bondage) to the Self. (24) How could the (all-knowing) Veda direct such men—blind to their
(real) interests and yet devout (convinced about the infallibility of the Vedas) and wandering
(as a reward of their sacrificial performances) in the path of enjoyment (the superhuman
species of life—the state of gods and other heavenly beings) and (then) entering (as a
punishment for their cruelty to animals in the course of those sacrificial performances) the
inanimate forms of life (such as the plant kingdom)—once more to those (very) enjoyments
(through such texts as `पशुकामो यजेत`, `आयुरिन्द्रियकामो यजेत`, `पुत्रादिकामो यजेत`-- One desirous of cattle,
One desirous of longevity,sound organs etc., and one desirous of progeny, wife and so on
should undertake sacrificial performances) ? (25) Not knowing such intention (of the Vedas),
some misguided people (the advocates of Karma or ritual acts) interpret the promises
(contained in the Vedas) of fruit (in the shape of final beatitude) as offering blossoms (alone
in the shape of heavenly enjoyment). (But) not so the knowers of (the real import of) the
Vedas (sages Vyasa and others) indeed. (26) Men seeking pleasures of sense and
(therefore ever) miserable, grasping, mistaking the enjoyments of heaven (which are like so
many flowers) as the (supreme) fruit (of human endeavour) confounded by their excessive
attachment to ritual acts (in which the sacred fire plays a prominent part) and finding the Path
of Smoke at the end (of their life) are not able to realize their own self. (27) With ritual acts
as the only theme of their talks and intent on gratifying their flesh, they are unable to know
Me, though present in their heart—Me, who am this universe and from whom this universe
has sprung up—any more than those whose eyes are bedimmed by mist are able to
recognize even that which is close at hand, O dear Uddhava ! (28) Not knowing My opinion—
which is not quite apparent, and which is to the effect that ifone has a passion for destruction
of life, it should be restricted to sacrificial performances only, and that there is no scriptural
ordinance making it obligatory on us—those wicked men indulging in destruction of life as
