Dis. 13] BOOK SIX 613

PHKKSKHHAPECEHREAKERERAEKEAEEAEKELESEEKEA AENEAN ENAAHN ELE HEHE EAE HAA AEHAR AAA AKER HAH

truth)-returned after that to heaven; and the sin (of having killed a Brahmana)-that had been
deprived of its force by Sri Rudra (the deity presiding over the north-east)—could not assail
him, protected (as he was) by Goddess Laksmi (the divine Consort of Lord Visnu, dwelling in
the bed of lotuses in the Manasa lake). (17)
a च ब्रह्मर्षयोऽभ्येत्य हयमेधेन भारत।यथावद्दीक्षयाञ्चक्रु: पुरुषाराधनेन ह ।१८॥
अथेज्यमाने पुरुषे सर्वदेवमयात्मनि | staat «meso वितते ब्रह्मवादिभि: 1१९1
a a wigan भूयानपि पापचयो नृप । नीतस्तेनैव yar नीहार ga भानुना IR!
स वाजिमेधेन यथोदितेन वितायमानेन मरीचिमिश्रै: ।
इट्टाधियज्ञं पुरुषं पुराणमिन्द्रो महानास विधूतपाप: ।२१॥
इदं महार्यानमरोषपाप्मनां प्रक्षालनं तीर्थपदानुकीर्तनम् ।
TS भक्तजनानुवर्णनं महेन्द्रमोक्षॆ fae मरुत्वत: 1221
पठेयुराख्यानमिदं सदा बुधा: शृण्वन्त्यथो पर्वणि पर्वणीन्द्रियम् ।
ay are निखिलाघमोचनं रिपुञ्जयं स्वस्त्ययनं तथाऽऽयुषम् । २३
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे इन्द्रविजयो नाम त्रयोदोऽध्याय: 1231
Brahmana sages (now) approached him, 0 Pariksit (a scion of Bharata), and duly
consecrated him, they say, for a horse-sacrifice intended to propitiate Sri Hari (the Supreme
Person). (18) Now, while the Supreme Person, who embodies in Himself all the divinities,
was being worshipped by the mighty Indra in the course of the (aforesaid) horse-sacrifice
elaborately performed through the instrumentality of sages who were (great) expositors of
the Vedas, even that huge mass of sin in the shape of the slaughter of the demon Vrtra (son
of the god Twasta), O king, was actually reduced to nothingness by that very sacrifice just
as the hoar-frost is melted by the sun. (19-20) By propitiating the most ancient Person, the
Deity presiding over sacrifices, through the (said) horse-sacrifice—which was being
elaborately performed according to the scriptural ordinance through the instrumentality of
Marici and other sages—the aforesaid Indra was completely rid of his sins and became
great (once more). (21) This great narrative is (decidedly) instrumental in washing off all
one’s sins and conducive to the growth of Devotion, replete as it is with the praises of the
Lord (whose holy feet enable one to ford the vast ocean of metempsychosis), containing an
account of His (great) devotee (Vrtra) as well as of the absolution and decisive victory of the
mighty Indra, nicknamed as Marutvan. (22) Therefore, the wise should always recite or hear
(at least) on every festival this story relating to Indra, which beings wealth, fame and
longevity, is a means of ridding one of all sinful propensities, and a source of (all) blessings
and helps one to conquer one’s enemies. (23)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse entitled "The victory of Indra"
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sat Pat Pat
PII SERS ey
