Dis. 4] BOOK TEN 119

व न व न न न न ५ 4 RARE EEE न् EAE न न ६ EEE REEL ENTRHKON EE सा क 64२ 44 44 ८ ७ 2 न ८ ८ ८4 २8 ०७ ७4७६ ८

malady appearing in the body and completely ignored (in its initial stages) by men cannot
be remedied once it has struck deep roots, or as the senses cannot be controlled if
neglected (and allowed to have their own way), so the enemy cannot be dislodged once
his strength gets consolidated and he grows mighty. (38) Indeed Visnu is the root (chief
support) of the gods and he stays where the eternal (Vedic) Religion prevails. Again,
Veda, the cow, the Brahmana, asceticism and the (institution of) sacrifices accompanied
by (liberal) sacrificial fees constitute the roots of the latter. (39) Therefore, O king, we
shall by all means kil! Brahmanas who are expositors of the Vedas, ascetics and those
given to sacrificig! performances as well as cows that yield materials (such as milk and
clarified butter) worthy of being offered as oblation into the sacrificial fire (inasmuch as
they are all instrumental in manifesting Visnu). (40) Brahmanas, cows and the Vedas,
asceticism, truthfulness, control of the senses and the mind, reverence, compassion
and endurance as well as sacrificial performances constitute (so many) embodiments of
Sri Hari. (41) He is unquestionably the ruler of all the gods, a (sworn) enemy of the
demons and indeed the indweller of (all) hearts. All the gods including Siva and Brahma
(the four-faced creator) have their origin in Him. Hence to extirpate the Asis—this
constitutes the (most effective) means of killing Visnu. (42)

AYE उवाच
एवं दुर्मन्रिभि: कंस: we aera दुर्मति: । ब्रह्महिंसां fed मेने कालपाशावृतोऽसुर:। ४३॥
सन्दिश्य साधुलोकस्य कदने कदनप्रियान् । कामरूपधरान् दिक्षु दानवान् गृहमाविशत्।४४॥
a वै रज: प्रकृतयस्तमसा मूढचेतस:। सतां विद्वेघमाचेरुरारादागतमृत्यव: । ४५
आयु: frat यशो ad लोकानाशिष wa च । हन्ति श्रेयांसि सर्वाणि Gat महदतिक्रम:। xe
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे पूर्वार्धे चतुर्थोऽध्याय:॥४॥

Sri Suka proceeded further: Having thus fully deliberated with his wicked
advisers, the evil-minded demon, Kamsa, thought the massacre of Brahmanas as
conducive to his good, enmeshed as he was by the snare of Death. (43) Commanding
the demons—who were fond of persecuting others and could assume any form they
liked—to oppress the righteous in all quarters, Karnsa retired into the palace. (44) The
demons, whose disposition was predominantly Rajasika (turbulent) and whose understanding
was clouded with Tamoguna (obtuseness), and whose death was near, acted inimically
towards the virtuous. (45) An outrage done to an exalted soul brings to an end a man’s
life, fortune, glory, religious merit, his title to the higher worlds as well as his desired
objects, nay, all blessings. (46)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.
RISE rs
