190 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

RR IR Ron aietoint dointaint trent reenter ene ed cert ketene Eee RET २२०२ २० १२२ २२२२ २२११ OER ERI न

been lost and who (consequently) felt (very) perturbed, all followed the track of the cows with
the help of the blades of grass cut by their hoofs and teeth and marked by their footprints. (4)
Having duly found their cattle-wealth, whose passage had been intercepted in that thicket
of rushes and which was piteously crying, the cowherds, who were seized with thirst and felt
exhausted (too), successfully drove it back from the thicket. (5) Called by the Lord in a tone
deep as the rumbling of clouds, the cows responded to His call, overjoyed as they were to
hear the shouting of their names. (6)

7: समन्ताद् व्रनधूमकेतुर्यदृच्छयाभूत् क्षयकृद् वनौकसाम्।

समीरित: सारथिनोल्बणोल्मुकैर्विलेलिहान: स्थिरजङ्घमान् महान्। ७ |

तमापतन्तं परितो «ca गोपाश्च ma: प्रसमीक्ष्व भीता: |

wag कृष्णं was प्रपन्ना यथा et मृत्युभयार्दिता जना: । ८ ।
कृष्ण कृष्ण महावीर हे रामामितविक्रम । दावाग्निना दह्यमानान् प्रपन्नांस्तातुमर्हथ: । ९ |

agree: कृष्ण न चार्हन्त्यवसीदितुम्। वयं हि सर्वधर्मज्ञ त्वन्नाथास्त्वत्परायणा: ।१०॥

Presently, by the will of Providence there broke out on all sides a_huge wild fire playing
havoc with the inhabitants of the forest and, lapping with its (tonguelike) fearful flames the
animate and inanimate beings, now that it was fanned by the wind (its helpmate). (7) The
cowherds as well as the cows felt dismayed to discern the forest conflagration advancing on
every side and, flying for succour to Sri Krsna and Balarama—even as people stricken with
the fear of death would seek Sri Hari—spoke (as follows). (8) "O Krsna, the Enchanter of all,
O mighty hero, O Rama of immeasurable prowess, be pleased to protect us, who are being
burnt by a wild fire and have sought You (as our refuge). (9) Surely, Your relations, OKrsna,
do not deserve to undergo suffering. We have as a matter of fact You (alone) as our protector
and ultimate refuge, O knower of all righteousness !” (10)

श्रीरुक उवाच
वचो fara कृपणं बन्धूनां भगवान् हरि: । निमीलवत मा ae लोचनानीत्यभाषत ।११॥
तथेति मीलिताक्षेषु भगव्रानग्निमुल्लणम् diet मुखेन तान् rege योगाधीशो व्यमोचवत् ।॥१२॥
ततश्च तेऽक्षीण्युन्मील्य पुनर्भाण्डीरमापिता: | निशाम्य विस्मिता आसन्नात्मानं गाश्च मोचिता: ।१३॥

कृष्णस्य योगवीर्यं तद् योगमायानुभावितम्। दावाग्नेरात्मन: क्षेमं वीक्ष्य ते मेनिरेऽमरम् । १४1

उ Suka continued : Hearing the piteous prayer of His friends, Lord Sri Hari said, "Shut
your eyes and do not be afraid." (11) When they had shut their eyes saying "Be it so,” the
Lord, the Master of Yoga (mystic powers), swallowed up the terrible fire and (thus) completely
rid them of the peril. (12) Nay, on opening their eyes they stood amazed to find themselves
as well as the cows rescued and brought to Bhandira* (13) Perceiving that Yogic power of
Sri Krsna—manifested by His Yogamaya—which had brought about their deliverance from
a wild fire, they believed Him to be an immortal. (14)

गा: सन्निवर्त्य सायाह्ने सहरामो जनार्दन: । वेणुं विरणयन् गोष्ठमगाद् गोपैरभिष्टुत: 1241
गोपीनां wae आसीद् गोविन्ददर्शने। क्षणं युगशातमिव यासां येन विनाभवत् ॥१६॥

मामैक्मनविद्मोऽध्वाय: ॥१९॥

+ The tree is stated to have been at a distance of 10 miles from the thicket of rushes.
