१98 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21

Sat Retire actc tr tree eh et 8H MR EEE TE PLETE RL AAA TERT A ERE EERE Se ER eee ett

(sleepless) eyes, other voices having altogether ceased for them. (The Gopis have evidently
concluded this from the fact that perching on the boughs of the tree of the Veda and
renouncing the fruit of actions promised in it, sages devote themselves to action alone—
corresponding to charming leaves—fixing their mind on the glory of Sri Krsna with the sole
object of securing a vision of the Lord). (14)

नद्यस्तदा तदुपधार्य `मुकुन्दगोतमावर्तलक्षितमनोभवभग्नवेगा: |
आलिङ्गनस्थगितमूर्मिभुजैर्मुरारेर्गृहणन्ति UE कमलोपहारा: 1१५1
Psst a सह रामगोपै: सञ्चारयन्तमनुवेणुमुदीरयन्तम्।
प्रेमप्रवृद्ध उदित: कुसुमावलीभि: सस्युर्व्यधात् स्ववपुषाम्बुद आतपत्रम् ।१६॥

Hearing the aforesaid music of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) on that occasion,
(even) the (inanimate) rivers—that had their rapid flow (towards the ocean, their darling)
arrested through love (for Sri Krsna) betrayed by eddies—clasped both the feet of Sri Krsna
(the Slayer of the demon Mura) with the arms of their waves in such a way as to fold them
in their embrace, offering lotuses (as a symbol of their heart). (15) Witnessing (with the eyes
of lightning) Sri Krsna duly pasturing the cattle of Vraja in the company of Balarama and the
(other) cowherd boys in the (hot) sun and playing on the flute in their rear, a cloud appeared
(over His head) and, swollen with love, did the service of an umbrella to its Friend (Sri Krsna,
who resembles the cloud in hue and like a cloud allays the suffering of the people) with its
body, covering Him (at the same time) with showers of flowers.*(16)

yi gear उरुगायपदाब्जरागश्रीकुङ्कुमेन दयितास्तनमण्डितेन ।

तद्दर्शनस्मररुजस्तृणरूषितेन लिम्पन्त्य आननकुचेषु जहुस्तदाधिम् ee!

हन्तायमद्रिबला हरिदासवर्यो चद् रामकृष्णचरणस्पर्शछप्रमोद: ।

मानं तनोति सहगोगणयोस्तयोर्यत् पानीयसूयवसकन्दरकन्दमूलै: ।१८॥

werd गतिमतां पुलकस्तरूणां निर्योगपाञकृतलक्षणयोर्विचित्रम् ।१९॥
एवंविधा भगवतो या वृन्दावनचारिण: | वर्णयन्त्यो मिथो गोप्य: क्रीडास्तन्मयतां ययु: । २०॥

Fully accomplished of their purpose are the Bhila women who, when smitten with pangs
of love at the Lord's sight, dismissed that agony besmearing their face and breasts with the
saffron paste (originally) painted on the bosom of His darling and rendered still more
charming by contact with the reddish hue of the lotus-feet of Sri Krsna (who is widely
celebrated) and (ultimately) transferred to the blades of grass (of Vrndavana due to His
ramblings there). (17) Ah, this mountain (Govardhana), O fair ones, is the foremost of Sri
Haris servants in that it not only derives supreme joy from the touch of the feet of Balarama
and Sri Krsna (joy which is betrayed by its horripilation in the form of fresh blades of grass),
but also extends its hospitality to the two Brothers alongwith their cows and followers through
(the fresh and pure) water (of its cascades), excellent pasture, caves (affording shelter to
them) and its (produce in the form of) bulbs and roots. (18) It is most wonderful that due to

* Although the flowers were evidently showerd by the gods riding in their aerial cars (Vide verse 12 above), the Gopis in
the ecstasy of love imagine them to have been showered by the cloud.
