Dis. 25] BOOK FOUR । 409`

RIKEN धी ड KGAA छं क ळेकज्यैन्वन्धैकछैत्य ज्जी HEH EEE MARAE रै कचक्तै त्री वी HEAR ESSE AEH eM eee Ee
ee SSS a ae ee EL SCN BT AL Be ज ना ET Hee ।

What woman's mind on this earth would not cling to your arms, resembling the body of a
serpent, O mighty-armed one? It is in order to wipe out the agony of helpless and forlorn
creatures (like me) with your smiling glances imbued with compassion that you move about
(in this world).” (42)

ARG Sara

gf dt दम्पती aa समुद्य समयं मिथ:। at fava पुरीं राजन्मुमुदाते wd समा: ।४३॥
उपगीयमानो ललितं तत्र तत्र च mee: | क्रीडन् परिवृत: स्रीभिर्हुदिनीमाविशच्छुचौ xv
aaa कृता द्वार: पुरस्तस्यास्तु द्वे अध:। पृथग्विषयगत्यर्थं तस्यां a: WAM: ।४५॥
पञ्च द्वारस्तु Ure दक्षिणैका तथोत्तरा । पश्चिमे द्वे अमूषां ते नामानि qa वर्णये ie!
खद्योताऽऽविर्मुखी च omens निर्मिते। विभ्राजितं जनपदं याति ताभ्यां द्युमत्सख: iv
नलिनी नालिनी च प्रागद्वारावेकत्र निर्मिते। अवधूतसखस्ताभ्यां विषयं याति सौरभम् ।॥४८|
मुख्या नाम Wee द्वास्तयाऽऽपणवहूदनौ i विषयौ याति पुरराड्रसज्ञविपणान्वित: wel
पितॄर्ह्यप पुर्या द्वादक्षिणेन पुरञ्जन:।राष्ट्र॰ दक्षिणपञ्जालं याति श्रुतधंरान्वित:|५०|
देवहूर्नाम पुर्या द्वा उत्तरेण पुरञ्जन:। राष्ट्रमुत्तरपञ्चालं याति श्रुतधरान्वित: ।५१।
आसुरी ATA पश्चाद् द्वास्तया याति पुरञ्जन: arm am विषयं दुर्मदेन समन्वित: 1421
निर्ऋतिर्नाम पश्चाद द्वास्तया याति पुरञ्जन:। वैशसं am विषयं लुब्धकेन समन्वित: 1431
अन्धावमीषां पौराणां निर्वाक्येशस्कृतावुभौ | अक्षण्वतामधिपतिस्ताभ्यां याति करोति च ex

Narada went on: Having thus signified on that spot their mutual agreement, the couple
entered that city and rejoiced (there) for a hundred years. (43) Glorified everywhere in a
sweet voice by panegyrists, Purafjana sported in the midst of damsels and entered a river
during the hot weather (to refresh himself). (44) For the passage of whosoever was the ruler
in the city to other territories seven (out of the nine) gates of that city had been constructed
in the upper (elevated) part, and two in the lower. (45) (Again) five (of these) entrances
opened towards the east, one towards the south, another towards the north and (the lower)
two faced the west, | mention their names (to you,) O king ! (46) Two of the eastern gates,
Khadyota and Avirmukhi (by name), had been built at the same place. Accompanied by (his
friend) Dyuman, Puranjana travelled to the land of Vibhrajita through these two (en-
trances).(47) Two more portals in the east, Nalini and Nalini (by name) had (also) been
constructed abjacently. Accompanied by (another friend) Avadhita, he sallied forth by them
to the territory of Saurabha. (48) The fifth entrance, facing the east, was called Mukhya.
Accompanied by (his two other friends) Rasajfa and Vipana, the ruler of the city went
by this to the lands of Apana and Bahtdana. (49) Pitrhu was (the name of) the gate in
the south of the city. Accompanied (by his friend) Srutadhara, Purafijana went (thereby) to
the kingdom of south of Paficala. (50) The entrance in the north of the city was called by the
name of Devahi. Accompanied by (the same) Srutadhara, Purafijana went (by this) to the
dominion of north Paficala. (51) Asuri was the name of the gate on the west. Accompanied
by (his friend) Durmada, Purafijana proceeded by that to the territory of Gramaka. (52) The
(other) entrance on the west was called Nirrti. Accompanied by (his friend) Lubdhaka,
Purafijana moved (by that) to the country known by the name of Vaisasa. (53) Two of the
city gates, Nirvak and Pesaskrt (by name), led to blind alleys. The lord of those endowed with
vision, Purafijana went about and did (everything) with the help of these two. (54)

स बर्ह्यन्तपपुरगतो विषूचीनसमन्वित: । मोहं wore हर्षं वा याति जायात्मजोद्भवम् । ५५।
