296 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 46
RR AAA RRR क

Seta tedster et ON HATHA THAR EAS EAS EEECE CETTE EERE eR Mee TETHER

समनन्दन् प्रजा: सर्वा Bl रामजनार्दनौ emo wget नष्टलब्धधना इव ।५०]
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे पूर्वार्धे गुरुपुत्रानयनं नाम पञ्चचत्वारिंशोऽध्याय: 1४५

The preceptor replied ; “The debt of your preceptor has been fully repaid by you both,
O my child ! Which of the desires of him who has been a preceptor to pupils like you can
remain unfulfilled as a matter of fact ? (47) Return to your home, O valiant ones ! May your
glory purify all and let the Vedas (ever) remain fresh (in your memory) here as well as
hereafter." (48) Thus permitted by Their preceptor, the two Brothers forthwith returned to
Their city (Mathura), O dear Pariksit, in Their chariot swift as wind and thundering like a
cloud.(49) All the people (of Mathura) greatly rejoiced to behold Balarama and Sri Krsna
(whom they had missed for many days) like peopte who had (once) lost and (then) recovered
their wealth. (50)

Thus ends the forty-fifth discourse entitled "The Lord brings back His preceptor's son
(from the abode of Death)," in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahariisa-Samhita.

xt St
PITS Sirs

अथ षट्चत्वारिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLVI
The Lord relieves the agony of Nanda (by despatching Uddhava to Vraja
with a message of endearment)
Se उवाच

वृष्णीनां प्रवरो मन्त्री कृष्णस्य दयित: सखा । frat बृहस्पते: साक्षादुद्धवो बुद्धिसत्तम: । १ |
तमाह भगवान् प्रेष्ठं भक्तमेकान्तिनं क्वचित्। गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिं प्रपन्नार्तिहरो aft: । २ ।
गच्छोद्धव at सौम्य fief प्रीतिमावह।गोपीनां मद्दियोगाधिं मत्सन्देगैर्विमोचय । ३ ।
ता मन्मनस्का मत्प्राणा मदर्थे त्यक्तदैहिका: । (मामेव दयितं प्रेष्ठमात्मानं मनसा गता:1*)

a त्यक्तलोकधर्मांश्च मदर्थे a बिभर्म्यहम् । ४ ।
मयि ता: प्रेयसां प्रेष्ठे qe गोकुलस्रिय: । स्मरन्त्योऽङ्गविमुह्यन्ति विरहौत्कण्ठ्यविह्वला: । ५ ।
धारयन्त्यतिकृच्छेण प्राय: प्राणान् कथञ्चन। प्रत्यागमनसन्देशैर्बल्लव्यो मे मदात्मिका: । ६ ।

Sri Suka began again : A beloved friend and counsellor of Sri Krsna was Uddhava, the
most distinguished of the Vrsnis and a direct disciple of the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor
of the gods) and foremostin intelligence. (1) Clasping his hand with His own on a certain day,
Lord Sri Hari, who alleviates the suffering of those that flee (for protection) to Him, spoke (as
follows) to Uddhava, who was most beloved of and exclusively devoted to Him:—{2)
"Proceed you, gentle Uddhava, to Vraja and (thereby) bring delight to Our parents (Nanda
and Yasoda) and relieve in particular the agony—caused by separation from Me—of the
cowherd women through My messages. (3) The latier have not only given their mind to Me
but their (very) life is centred in Me; (nay,) they have renounced for My sake everything

*The part of the verse placed within brackets has not been commented on by Sridhara.
