510 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 90

ज् गम माल् माङ माजा शामाक मा शा न #8 99 सा न न १२ 9 न १ ६१2

and streets were day and night thronged with young elephants in rut, nchly adorned soldiers,
horses and brilliant chariots plated with gold. On every side of the city there were gardens
and parks containing rows of trees in blossom which were filled with the music of birds and
humming bees. ॥ was a city abounding in wealth of every description. The world's greatest
heroes, the Yadus, considered it a privilege to live in it and enjoy its amenities. The women
of that city possessed budding youth. When, while playing with balls etc., in their mansions,
their gorgeous dress got unsettled exposing a part of their body, it flashed as a streak of
lightning. The Lord of Laksmi (the goddess of prosperity) Himself lived in that city with great
ease and comfort. ॥ was His own (favourite) city. (1—4) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was the one
beloved consort of (more than) sixteen thousand wives. Each of them possessed a mansion
of surpassing wealth and splendour for her residence. Assuming as many charming forms
as He had wives, He sported with them (severally) in their mansions. (5) All these mansions
possessed beautiful tanks of their own. Their limpid water was ever fragrant with the pollen
of lotuses of every description, (Swans, cranes and other beautiful) birds (continually)
warbled in them. (6) The Lord of prosperity (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) sported (with His consorts)
entering the water of the rivers, and the saffron on the breasts of these ladies transferred itself
to His bosom as they embraced Him (in the course of these sports.) (7) The Gandharvas (at
that time) sang His praises, while the Sutas, Magadhas and bards joyously sounded their
clay tomtoms, kettledrums, tabors and lutes. (8)

सिच्यमानोऽच्युतस्ताभिर्हसन्तीभि: स्म रेचकै: । प्रतिषिञ्जन् विचिक्रीडे यक्षीभिर्यक्षराड्वि । ९ ।
ता: क्लिन्नवस्त्रविवृतोरुकुचप्रदेशा: सिञ्चन्त्य उद्धृत्तबृहत्कबरप्रसूना: |
ar स्म रेचकजिहीरषयोपगुह्य जातस्मरोत्सवलसद्वदना fate: ।१०॥
कृष्णस्तु ततत्स्तनविषज्जितकुङ्कुमस्रकक्रीडाभिषङ्गधुतकुन्तलवृन्दबन्ध: |
सिञ्चन् मुहुर्युवतिभि: प्रतिषिच्यमानो रेमे करेणुभिरिवेभपति: परीत: 1११॥
नटानां नर्तकीनां च गीतवाद्योपजीविनाम्। क्रीडालङ्कारवासांसि कृष्णोऽदात्तस्य च स्रिय: । १२।
कृष्णस्यैवं विहरतो = गत्यालापेक्षितस्मितै: । नर्मक्ष्वेलिपरिष्ङ्गै: स्रीणां किल हता धिय: ।१३॥
ऊचुर्मुकुन्दैकधियोऽगिर उन्मत्तवज्जडम् । चिन्तयन्त्योऽरविन्दाक्षं तानि मे गदत: शृणु esl
The consorts of the Lord would (now and then) smilingly throw jets of water on Him
through syringes, and He (too) sprinkled water on them and drenched them in return.
Sporting thus with His wives, He would appear like Kubera (the king of Yaksas) sporting with
Yaksa women.(9) The breasts and thighs of these ladies would appear through their wet
clothes, and flowers stuck to their swollen braids would drop. Throwing water on Him
(through their syringes), they would approach Him with intent to wrest the syringe from His
hands, and make it an excuse for embracing their beloved Lord. Through His thrilling touch
their love would grow all the more, which would make their face bloomin greatjoy. The beauty
of the queens naturally increased on such occasions. (10) The garland of sylvan flowers
hanging on Bhagavan Sri Krsna's bosom would get tinged with the saffron on their breasts.
Through intense absorption in enjoyment the braid of His curly locks would get loosened and
begin to wave free in the air. He would throw, again and again, jets of water on His consorts,
who in their turn would drench Him in the same fashion. In this way the Lord sported with His
consorts (even) as the leader of a herd of wild elephants would with their females. (11) (On
the conclusion of this sport) Bhagavan Sri Krsna and His consorts would give away their
clothes and ornaments used at the time of sport to male and female dancers and to those
who subsisted by vocal and instrumental music. (12) (Pariksit!) that is how the Lord used to
Carry on His sports. His (charming) gait, (sweet) words, (endearing) glances, (enchanting)
