224 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20
ROR a ater sere te ee EE ee ee Ee OHA HE EEE OO HLS OHH HERE UHHHKEH HH OH
ससर्जच्छायया feat पञ्चपर्वाणमग्रत: । तामिस्रमन्धतामिस्रं तमो मोहो महातम: ।१८॥
विससर्जात्मन: कायं नाभिनन्दंस्तमोमयम्। जगृहुर्यक्षरक्षांसि रात्रिं क्षुत्तृदसमुद्धवाम् 1281
कषुत्तृड्भ्यामुपसृष्टास्ते तं gag: । मा रक्षतेनं जक्षध्वमित्यूत्रु: क्षुत्तृडर्दिता: 1201
देवस्तानाह संविम्रो मा oat जक्षत tad अहो A यक्षरक्षांसि प्रजा यूयं बभूविथ 122)

When the Lord who sleeps on the waters forming the support of the cosmos entered his
heart (as the Inner Controller), Brahma (the creator) started creating hierarchy of the various
worlds according to the plan evolved by him in the preceding Kalpas. (17) At the very outset
he evolved out of his shadow (ignorance) the five varieties of Avidya (Nescience), viz.,
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Tamas, Moha and Mahamoha* (18) Brahma threw off that body of
his (in the form of a shadow); for he did not like it, made up as itwas of darkness (ignorance).
The Yaksas and Raksasas (who had sprung therefrom) took possession of that body, which
continued in the form of night and is the source of hunger and thirst. (19) Overpowered by
hunger and thirst, they ran to devour him from all sides. “Spare him not (out of compassion,
thinking thathe is our father); eat him up!"+ they all cried, oppressed as they were with hunger
and thirst. (20) The god (Brahma) grew nervous (at this unexpected turn) and pleaded with
them, “Pray, eat me not; but spare me. For you have all been born as sons to me, O Yaksas
and Raksasas!" (21)

देवता: प्रभया या या दीव्यन् प्रमुखतोऽसृजत्। a अहार्षुर्देवयन्तो विसृष्टां at प्रभामह: 1221
देवोऽदेवाञ्जघनत: सृजति स्मातिलोलुपान्।त एनं लोलुपतया मैथुनायाभिपेदिरे 1231
at हसन् स भगवानसुरैर्निरपत्रपै: । अन्वीयमानस्तरसा get भीत: परापतत् । २४॥
a sa ag प्रपन्नार्तिहरॆ afi अनुग्रहाय भक्तानामनुरूपात्मदर्शनम् | २५॥
पाहि oat परमात्मंस्ते प्रेषणेनासृजं प्रजा: । ता इमा यभितुं पापा उपाक्रामन्ति मां प्रभो । २६॥
त्वमेक: किल लोकानां क्लिष्टानां sae: । त्वमेक: क्लेशादस्तेषामनासन्नपदां तव । २७।

Shining with glory he created, before all others, the divinities that had the element of
Sattva or goodness predominant in them. When Brahma dropped (even) that effulgent
form (out of which he had evolved those divinities, and) which now figured as daytime, the
gods sportfully took possession of it. (22) The glorious Brahma (next) evolved from his
hinder partt the demons, who are excessively fond of women. Being very lustful they came
up to him for copulation. (23) The worshipful Brahma first laughed (at their stupidity); but
finding the shameless Asuras close upon him, he grew indignant and ran out of fearin great
haste. (24) He approached SriHari, the Bestower of boons, who dispels the agony of those
running up to Him for succour, and who in order to show His grace to His devotees
reveals Himself in a form answering their conception. (25) "Protect me, O Supreme
Spirit! | created these beings as directed by You, but these sinful creatures are out
to copulate with me, my Lord. (26) You are the only one capable of ending the affliction
of distressed people as also the one inflicting agony on those who never resort to Your feet
(for protection)." (27)

* For the meaning of these terms see verse 2 of Discourse XII above.

+ Of these two species of living beings those who said "Eat him up! (4#3)" were classed as Yaksa; while they who said
"Spare him ... (रक्षत)“ came to be known as Raksasas.

+ This is corroborated by the Sruti text: `स जगतादसुरानसृजत`,

