532 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA (Dis. 4

२१२७ १२२ EOS २०७ . ७७ ० १२२२ १5 ग ग्न # 96०१ ४७ १४१ १६ ERE KEENE eH EAH ENEHEN SHER १७ 4 १ ११ HERE

Some people get over us in the guise of hunger and thirst, cold, heat and rain (the
distinguishing features of the cold and the hot weather and the rains), control the air, the
palate and fhe sexual urge, which are (so) difficult to cross like endless oceans, but they fall
victims to futile anger and thus render useless their hard austerities. They are like persons
who having crossed oceans get drowned in the hollow caused by a cow's hoof." (11) When
Kamadeva, Spring etc., thus praised Him, the almighty Narayana (produced and) displayed
women of wonderful beauty, fully adorned (with ornaments), waiting upon Himself (And thus
the pride of Kamadeva and his retinue was humbled). (12) Those attendants of Indra saw
these women, as beautiful as Goddess Laksmi, and got enchanted by the fragrance of their
bodies; they found their own beauty faint when compared with their surpassing beauty. (13)
Lord Narayana laughingly 1०6 thé humbled Kamadeva and others that they might choose
from among those women one like themselves who would be an ornament to heaven. (14)
Obeying this command with the word "Amen !" indra’s attendants offered their respects to
Narayana and choosing Urvasi, the best of those celestial damsels, returned to heaven
following her. (15) They bowed to Indra in the court of the gods, and described to them, eager
to hear, the prowess of Narayana, hearing which Indra was astonished and got dismayed.(16)

हंसस्वरूप्यवदद्च्युत आत्मयोगं दत्त: SAR ऋषभो भगवान् पिता न: 1
विष्णु: शिवाय जगतां कलयावतीर्णस्तेनाहता मधुभिदा श्रुतयो हयास्ये ।१७॥
शुप्तोऽप्यये मनुरिलौषधयश्च मात्स्ये क्रौडे हतो दितिज उद्धरताम्भस: क्ष्माम् ।
कौर्मे धृतोऽद्रिरमृतोन्मथने स्वपृष्ठे ग्राहात् प्रपन्नमिभराजममुञ्चदार्तम् ।१८॥
संस्तुन्वतोऽब्धिपतिताञ्छ्मणानृषींश्च wah च वृत्रवधतस्तमसि प्रविष्टम् ।
देवस्तियोऽसुरगृहे पिहिता अनाथा जघ्नेऽसुरेन्द्रमभयाय सतां नृसिंहे eel
देवासुरे युधि च दैत्यपतीन् सुरार्थे हत्वान्तरेषु भुवनान्यदधात् कलाभि: ।
भूत्वाथ वामन इमामहरद् TS: क्ष्मां याच्ञाच्छलेन समदाददिते: सुतेभ्य: 1201
नि:क्षत्रियामकृत गां च त्रि:सप्तकृत्वो रामस्तु हैहयकुलाप्ययभार्गवाग्नि: |
सोऽब्धिं aaa दहावक्त्रमहन् सलङ्कं सीतापतिर्जयति लोकमलघ्नकीर्ति: 1221
भूमेर्भरावतरणाय saan we: करिष्यिति सुरैरपि दुष्कराणि ।
वादैर्विमोहयति यज्ञकृतोऽतदर्हान् शूद्रान् wet क्षितिभुजो न्यहनिष्यदन्ते 1221
एवंविधानि कर्माणि wan च जगत्पते: । भूरीणि भूरियदसो वर्णितानि महाभुज । २३
Appearing for the good of the worlds in (varying) digits as the divine Swan, Lord Dattatreya,
the sages Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana and Sanatkumara, and our father, Lord Rsabha, the
immortal Lord Visnu Himself taught the knowledge of the Self. in the form of Hayagriva He killed
(the demon) Madhu and recovered the Vedas (from him). (17) In His descent in the form of the
divine Fish fhe Lord rescued at the time of universal dissolution the Manu (named Satyavrata)
and protected the earth as well as (the seeds of) the (different) foodgrains. Lifting the earth from
(the bottom of) the ocean in His descent as the divine Boar, He killed the demon (Hiranyaksa).
Inthe form of the divine Tortoise, He supported the mountain (called Mandara) on His back when
the ocean was being churned for nectar, and rescued the distressed king of elephants from (the
jaws of the) alligator when the former sought Him (for protection). (18) The Lord rescued the Rsis
(known as the Valakhilyas) who (being of the size of a thumb and) having grown weak through
austerities had fallen intoa pit (as though into the sea) and had been duly praising Him. (Similarly)

He saved Indra, who had incurred the sin of Brahmanicide by having killed Vitra (a Brahmana
by birth), and further rescued helpless celestial women who stood imprisoned in the houses of
