Dis. 24] BOOK ELEVEN 633

SOT मामा HI NONE न ROTA SCOT ICR HO RE TSO ETO ४98 ४५६ SRE OE OR En १२१०

worlds— Swarloka or paradise, Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka)—with their
guardian deities. (11) (Of these three spheres), Swarloka (construed in the narrow sense of
paradise) constituted the home of the gods; Bhuvarloka, of spirits and Bhirloka, of men and
other living beings (constituting the sub-human species—animals, birds, reptiles, insects
and moths etc.); while the (ethereal) region extending beyond the three (aforesaid) worlds
constituted the home of the Siddhas (eminent Brahmana sages like Bhrgu). (12) Brahma (the
ruler of the universe) created a home for the Asuras (demons) and the Nagas (serpent-
demons) underground (in the subterranean regions known by the name of Atala and so on).
In the aforesaid three spheres, are worked out all the destinies of those prompted by the three
Gunas (Sattva etc.). (13) Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, (Brahmaloka) are
the (successively higher) goals—free from (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment, greed
etc.)—to be reached through Yoga (as propounded by the sage Pataiijali), askesis (as
practised by those belonging to the third stage of life, viz., Vanaprastha) and Sarnnyasa
(renunciation as practised by recluses, that have renounced their home as well as family life);
(whereas) My realm (Vaikuntha) is the objective to be reached through the discipline of
Devotion. (14) With Me, having Kala (the Time-Spirit) for My energy, as the Dispenser of the
fruit of actions, this (living) creation, yoked to Karma, rises higher (upto the Brahmaloka) and
descends (to the level of the plant kingdom in the scale of spiritual evolution according to the
nature of his actions) in this world (of matter), which is (nothing but) a stream of the three
Gunas. (15) Minute or large, lean or stout, whatever entity has come into being is pervaded
by (made up of) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (Spirit) both. (16) That which really constitutes
the beginning as well as the end of a thing represents its middle too and that alone is real
(inasmuch as it pervades all its states). Its modifications have only a practical value even as
the modifications (ornaments etc.), of gold or those of clay (viz., earthenware). (17) That
alone is real, adopting which as its material an earlier existence (e.g., the Mahat-tattva)
produces a later existence (e.g., Ahankara). That which is intended in a particular instance
to be mentioned as the beginning and end of some effect is spoken of as real. (18) The well-
known material cause of this (visible) universe, viz., Prakrti (Primordial Matter), He who
presides over this Prakrti, viz., the Supreme Person, and the Time-Spirit, which manifests
the universe (by disturbing the equilibrium of Prakrti)—all these three are as a matter of fact
the same as |, the Infinite. (19) The elaborate process of creation ever continues in (due)
order of succession (from father to son) for the sake of (enjoyment of) the embodied soul (that
undergoes birth in various species of life made up of the three Gunas) until the life of the
universe comes to a close, or (in other words) until the Lord (Myself) so wills it. (20) When
contacted (gazed on) by Me (as the Time-Spirit, the Destroyer of created beings), the cosmic
egg, in which the creation and dissolution of the worlds alternately take place, becomes fit
alongwith the (various) worlds (comprised in it) for disintegration into the five (gross)
elements. (21) (Consequent on the total failure of crops occasioned by a prolonged drought
extending over a hundred years) the mortal body (of human beings and other living
creatures) is withdrawn into the food (on which it subsisted); the food is reduced to seeds
(persists in the form of seeds alone); the seeds get merged into the soil (no longer take root);
while the earth (on being dried by the sun and burntby the flames emanating from the mouths
of Lord Sankarsana) is reduced to (the subtle state of) odour (the cause of the earth). (22)
Odour gets merged into (its cause, the element of) water and water is reduced to its own
(essential property, viz., the quality of) taste. Taste gets merged into (its cause, the element
of) fire, and fire is withdrawn into (its own essential property of) colour. (23) Colour gets
merged into (its cause,) the air and the latter is reduced to (its subtle state, viz., the quality
of) touch while that too gets merged into (its cause, the element of) ether. Ether (on being

[565] B.M. Part II—49
