Dis. 29 ] BOOK FOUR 425
SOSERONE SCRE STS SIE ORCI RECENT, Ye SO St SIE RII RIN HEIR IN IORI IT Reet a RR RRO RH ANCHOR te BB ee
REM HMI BH HOM MEG MR RN HE

bea source of fresh trouble). (33) Even asa dream inadream constitutes only a change from
one dream experience to another, but does not bring about the cessation of the dream, so
mere action (divorced from the realization of Truth) is no ultimate remedy for (the sufferings
brought about by one's own) actions, both being conceived in ignorance, O pure-hearted
monarch ! (34) Just as for a man roving about in the dream-world with the mind, which
conditions his soul, there is no cessation of dream experiences, so also (the vicious circle
of ) transmigration does not cease (for the man who is buried in the sleep of ignorance) even
though the phenomena of the world have no reality. (85) Now freedom from ignorance—
ignorance, which bringsin its train a chain of evils in the form of transmigration to the eternally
existent soul, is secured through supreme devotion to the Lord, the (supreme) Guru. (36)
Contact firmly established with the Lord through Devotion will automatically induce aversion
to the pleasures of sense and bring_enlightenment. (37) That contact through Bhakti,
depending as it does on the stories of the immortal Lord, becomes an accomplished fact
before long, O royal sage, for him who devoutly listens to or reads such stories everyday.(38)
In a place where there are pious and pure-hearted devotees whose mind is impatient to
repeat andlisten to the praises of the Lord, O king, there flowin all directions streams of pure
nectar-like stories of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) recited by exalted souls.
Hunger and thirst, fear, grief and infatuation never afflict those who drinkin such stories with
intent ears knowing no satiation, 0 Pracinabarhi ! (39-40) Ever harassed by these natural
enemies, people do not indeed take delight in the ocean of the nectarine stories of Sri
Hari.(41) Brahma (the lord of all divinities presiding over procreation) himself, Lord Siva (who
lives on Mount Kailasa), Swayambhuva Manu, Daksa and the other lords of creation,
Sanaka and other sages vowed to perpetual celibacy and expositors of the Vedas—Marici,
Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu, and Vasistha, including myself—all masters of
speech—have not been able even to this day to behold the supreme Lord, the Seer (of all),
in spite of our efforts to perceive Him through asceticism, worship and concentration of
mind. (42—44) Moving about (freely) in the vast expanse of the Veda, the depth of which
cannot be easily sounded, and worshipping the forms of Indra and other gods endowed with
characteristics (such as the thunderbolt etc.) as indicated in the texts of the Vedas, we fail
to know the Supreme. (45) When, contemplated upon in the heart, the Lord showers His
grace on some particular individual, the devotee so blessed gives up his faith, however
deep-rooted, in the worldly usage as well as in the Vedic rituals. (46)

तस्मात्कर्मसु बर्हिष्मन्नज्ञानादर्थकाशिषु । मार्थदृष्टिं कृथा: श्रोत्रस्पर्शिष्रस्पृष्टवस्तुषु ix!
स्वं लोकं न विदुस्ते वै यत्र देवो जनार्दन: । आहुर्धूम्रधियो aa सकर्मकमतद्विद: ।४८॥
तत्कर्म हरितोषं यत्सा विद्या तन्मतिर्यया ise

हरिर्देहभृतामात्मा स्ववं प्रकृतिरीश्वर: । तत्पादमूलं aT यत: क्षेमो नॄणामिह । ५०॥

a a प्रियतमश्चात्मा यतो न भयमण्वपि | sft ae स वै विद्वान् यो विद्वान् स गुरुर्हरि: 1421
Therefore, 0 Pracinabarhi, do not regard rituals as real—rituals which, though their
accounts are alluring to hear, have no relation whatsoever with the (ultimate) Reality. They
appear as real only through ignorance. (47) Men of impure (clouded) understanding, who
speak of the Vedas as devoted to rituals, are not (really) conversant with the Vedas,
inasmuch as they do not know the truth about the Spirit, that is their own essence and where
dwells Lord Janardana—in other words, which is the same as Lord Janardana. (48) Having
strewn the whole terrestrial globe with blades of Kuga grass, their ends turned towards the
east, you have grown arrogant and proud of your extensive slaughter of animals. You know
nothing about the ritual nor of whatis higher than that (viz., wisdom). That alone is (classed
as) the ritual, which conduces to the pleasure of Sri Hari; (and) that alone is wisdom, which

[564] B. M. 16—
