Dis. 85] BOOK TEN 483

SSC Rn eee ee eh टाशाक A Ne KEKE Se TAKA eh ene eH

इत्युक्त्वा तान् समादाय इन्द्रसेनेन पूजितौ । पुनर्द्दरवतीमेत्य मातु: पुत्रानयच्छताम् ।५२।
तान् ge बालकान् देवी पुत्रस्नेहस्नुतस्तनी । परिघ्रज्याङ्कमारोप्य मूर्ध्यजिघ्रदभीक्ष्णहा: 143!
अपाययत् स्तनं प्रीता सुतस्पट्पिरिट्टुत्म।पोहिताफ्याविष्णोर्ययासृष्टि:प्रवर्तंते।५४।
पीत्वामृतं पयस्तस्या: पीतदेषं गदाभृत: । नारायणाङ्गसंस्पर्शाप्रतिलब्धात्मदर्शना: । ५५॥
a नमस्कृत्य गोविन्दं देवकीं पितरं gem मिषतां सर्वभूतानां ययुर्धाम दिवौकसाम् । ५६।
त्तं gg देवकी देवी मृतागमननिर्गमम्। मेने सुविस्मिता मायां कृष्णस्य रचितां नृप । ५७।
एवंविधान्यद्भुतपनि कृष्णस्य परमात्मन: । वीर्याण्यनन्तवीर्यस्य सन्त्यनन्तानि भारत । ५८1

The glorious Lord said : (O chief of demons)) in the first Manvantara (presided over
by Swayambhuva Manu) Marici had six sons through his wife Urna. They were all gods.
They laughed when they saw Brahma intent upon sexual intercourse with his own
daughter. (47) Onaccount of this misdemeanour on their part they (were cursed by Brahma
and) had to take birth in the Asura race as the sons of Hiranyakasipu. Thence they were
transferred to Devaki’s womb by Yogamaya, and were murdered by Kamsa as they were
born. (O chief of the Daityas,) mother Devaki grieves for those children of her own, who are
nowwith you. (48-49) For removing the sorrow of our mother We propose to take them from
here. They will thereby get completely freed from their curse, once for all and will happily
return to their (celestial) abode. (50) Their names are Smara, Udgitha, Parigvanga,
Patanga, Ksudrabhrt and Ghrni. By My grace, all the six of them will regain their (original)
happy state. (51) (Pariksit,) having thus explained Their mission to Bali, the two Brothers
took the children with Them and, duly worshipped by Bali, returned to Dwaraka and handed
over the children to mother Devaki.{52) At the sight of those children, milk began to flow
from the breasts of Devaki through (excess of) maternal love. Placing them on her lap, she
embraced them and repeatedly smell their crowns. (53) Overwhelmed with emotion at the
touch of her children, she suckled them with great delight, deluded as she was by the Lord's
Yogamaya, which takes the form of affection in order to keep the cycle of creation going
on. (54) The milk in Devaki's breasts was veritable nectar, for it was the remnant of what
had been tasted by Sri Krsna. Having suckled such milk and, blessed with the touch of the
Supreme Lord, they attained knowledge of the Self. (65) They (now) bowed to Sri Krsna
(the Protector of cows), (mother Devaki), their father (Vasudeva) and Balarama, and
ascended the abode of the celestials in the presence of all.(56) Mother Devaki was
astounded to see her deceased children return to earth and then depart again, and
concluded that it was nothing but a sport of Sri Krsna, O protector of men!{57) Sri Krsna,
O scion of Bharata, is the same as the Supreme Spirit; His powers are unlimited. Endless
are His exploits which are so wonderful as this. (58)

सूत उवाच
य इदमनुशृणोति श्रावयेद् वा मुरारेश्चरितममृतकीर्तेर्वर्णितं व्यासपुत्रै: |
जगदघभिदलं तद्धक्तसत्कर्णपूरं भगवति कृतचित्तो ofa तत्क्षेमधाम । ५९1
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामम्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे मृताग्रजानयनं नाम पञ्चाक्षीतितमोऽध्याय: 124)

३ resumed : 0 sages, the fame and glory of Sri Krsna are immortal. The stories of
His sports rid the world of all sins and bring delight to the ears of devotees and saints. They
