Dis. 9 BOOK TWELVE 703

RRR ROR RACH RRA RE REPRO RERE REASON AR ALAS IA RAIA IIASA LEIBA IH AIA AAA AAAI त्तमा

you on account of your observing the vow of lifelong celibacy. May all be well with you !
(Therefore) receive your coveted boon from (Me,) the Ruler of all those who are capable of
granting boons. (3)

ऋषिरुवाच
जिते ते देवदेवेश प्रपन्नार्तिहराच्युत। वरेणैतावतालं नो यद् भवान् समदूश्यत । ४ |
गृहीत्वाजादयो यस्य श्रीमत्पादाब्जदर्शनम्। मनसा योगपक्वेन स भवान् मेऽक्षगोचर: । ५ |
अथाप्यम्बुजपत्राक्ष पुण्यर्लोकशिखामणे | द्रक्ष्ये मायां यया लोक: सपालो वेद सद्भिदाम् । ६ ।

The sage submitted : Your (own) exalted nature has been testified to by You, O Ruler
(even) of Brahma, Siva and others (the adored of the gods), in that You have been directly
perceived by us, O Dispeller of the agony of those that have taken refuge in You! This much
of favour (shown by You) is enough (for us), O immortal Lord ! (4) Brahma (the unbom
creator) and others have felt perfectly gratified (even) on obtaining a vision of Your glorious
lotus-like feet (only) in their mind purified through (the practice of) Yoga (concentration). The
selfsame Lord in You has come within the range of my senses. (What greater boon than this
could | have ?) (5) Nevertheless, O Lord with eyes resembling the petals of a lotus !1 would
have a vision of Your Maya, under the influence of which the world including the guardians
of the spheres perceives diversity (in the form of this manifold creation) in the (one) Reality
(viz., Yourself), O crest-jewel of those enjoying sacred renown ! (8)

सूत उवाच
इतीडितोऽर्चित: काममूषिणा भगवान् Wi तथेति स स्मयन् प्रागाद् बदर्याश्रममीश्वर: । ७ ।
तमेव चिन्तयन्नर्थमूषि: «em एव a: | वसन्नग्न्यर्कसोमाम्बुभूवायुवियदात्मसु 1 ८ ।
ध्यायन् wa च हरिं भावद्रव्यैरपूजयत्।क्वचित् gat विसस्मार प्रेमप्रसरसम्प्रुत: । ९ ।
Sita continued: Extolled in these words and worshipped by the sage according to his
wishes, O Saunaka ! the said almighty Lord replied, "So shall it be !" and withdrew to
Badarikagrama smiling. (7) Thinking (every moment) of the same object (the promised
vision of the Lord’s Maya) and continuing in his own hermitage, Markandeya visualized Sri
Hari in the (sacred) fire, the sun, the moon, water, earth, the air, ether and his own self,
nay, everywhere (else) and worshipped Him with articles conceived by the mind. At times
(however), when overwhelmed with an outburst of emotion, he forgot worshipping the
Lord. (8-9)
तस्यैकदा भृगुश्रेष्ठ पुष्पभद्रातरे मुने: । उपासीनस्य सन्ध्यायां ब्रह्मन् वायुरभून्महान् ।१०।
4 were समुदीरयन्तं बलाहका अन्वभवन् कराला: ।
अक्षस्थविष्ठा मुमुचुस्तडिद्धि: स्वनन्त उच्चैरभिवर्षधारा: 1881
aa व्यदृश्यन्तं चतु:समुद्रा॥ समन्तत:र क्ष्मातलमाग्रसन्त: ।
समीरवेगोर्मिभिरुग्रनक्रमहाभयावर्तगभीरघोषा:र । १२॥
अन्तर्बहिश्चाद्भिरतिद्युभि॥ खरै: हातह्रदाभीरुषतापितॆ जगत्।
aged der सहात्मना मुनिर्जलाघ्रुतां ent विमना: समत्रसत्।१३॥
आपूर्यमाणो वर्षद्भिरम्बुदै: क्ष्मामप्यधाद् द्वीपवर्षाद्रिभि:३ समम् ।१४॥
