Dis. 6] BOOK NINE 25

Reeheererh vent heeeanreercerervenvcerseshtrrenserverseestesrtrvvnnsterensererwnsg ecw

द्रव्यं मन्त्रो विधिर्यज्ञो anaes: धर्मो tag कालश्च सर्वमेतद् यदात्मकम् । ३६।
ued, gi Bi स्म यावच्च प्रतितिष्ठति । ad aq यौवनाश्वस्य मान्धातु: क्षेत्रमुच्यते ।३७॥

The son of Purafijaya was Anena (the sinless) and Prthu was the son of Anena. From
(the loins of ) Prthu sprang up ViSwarandhi and Candra was born of ViSwarandhi; and
Yuvanaéwa was the son of Candra. (20) The son of Yuvanagwa was Sabasta, by whom the
.town of Sabasti was built; while Brhadagwa was the son of Sabasta and of the former,
Kuvalayaswa_was bom. (21) With a view to obliging the sage Utanka, the powerful
Kuvalayaswa, surrounded (accompanied) by his twenty-one thousand sons, killed a demon;
Dhundhu by name, and (thereby) became known as Dhundhumara (the slayer of Dnundhu).
(Almost) all the aforesaid sons of Dnundhumara, however, were burnt up by the fire that
issued from the mouth of Dhundhu; only three, viz., Drdhaswa, Kapilagwa and Bhadraswa
were left (alive), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! Harya$wa was the son of Drdhaswa, while
that of Haryaswa was called Nikumbha. (2224) Barhanagwa was the son of Nikumbha;
Krsaswa, of Barhanaswa; and Senajit was the son of Krsaswa. senajit's son was Yuvanasgwa.
Being issueless and (therefore) full of despair, the latter (however) retired to a forest
(hermitage) alongwith his hundred wives. The sages (of that hermitage) were (very)
compassionate by nature. Lo! with (great) concentration of mind they conducted on his behalf
a sacrifice intended to propitiate Indra (the Lord of paradise). (25-26) Feeling thirsty at night,
the king (Yuvanagwa) entered their sacrificial hut and, finding the Brahmanas (in charge
of the sacrifice) asleep, drank the water (that had been) consecrated with Mantras (and
reserved for the principal queen) himself. (27) Seeing the (sacrificial) pitcher without water
when they got up (inthe early hours), Oking, the priests now enquired (of the king) whose
work itwas that the water capable of producing a male child had been quaffed. (28) Having
presently come to know that the water had been drunk by the king (himself) as impelled
by Providence, they offered salutation to the Almighty Lord, saying: "Oh, the power of
destiny (alone) is (the real) strength !” (29) Then, when the time came (i. e., aftera period
of nine months) a son, (who was) destined to be a rular of the (entire) globe, was born,
splitting open, itis said, the right pelvic region of king Yuvanasgwa. (30) When the babe cried
much (for being suckled) and the Brahmanas anxiously inquired: "Whom will this prince
suck?", Indra putinto the babe's mouth his index finger (dripping with nectar), saying "The
babe will suck me (Mam Dhata); do not cry, my child!” (Hence the babe became known as
Mandhata). (31) The father of the babe did not die by the grace of the Brahmanas and the
gods (even though he had his pelvic region split up). (Nay,) he forthwith attained perfection
(final beatitude) in that very hermitage through asceticism. (32) Indra for his part gave him,
O dear Pariksit, the name of Trasaddasyu (the terror of miscreants) inasmuch as villains like
Ravana (the demon king of Lanka, who was subsequently killed by Lord Sri Rama, born in
that very line) were (much) afraid of him and felt (greatly) agitated (because of him). (33)
Powerful through the might of the immortal Lord, Mandhata, son of Yuvanaswa, ruled the
(entire) globe consisting of the seven Dwipas (main divisions) as its one supreme Lord.
(34) Although a knower of the Self, he propitiated Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over
sacrifices)— who not only represents all the gods (on His person*) but embodies all and
is above sense-perceptionby means of (a naumber of) sacrifices in which liberal Daksinas
(or presents of money) were given (to the Brahmanas). (35) (As amatter of fact,) the material
(to be used in a sacrificial performance), the sacred texts (uttered in the course of a
sacrifice), the procedure (laid down for conducting it), the sacrifice (itself), the sacrificer as
well as the priests (officiating at the sacrifice), Dharma (religious merit resulting from a virtuous
deed), the place as well as the time of a sacrificial performance—in fact, the whole universe
represents His body. {It was such a Lord whom Mandhata worshipped through the aforesaid

[565] B.M. Part II—30

