528 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3

ग्न प न न TET TTS CONTE ग EO OER EERO CEE R ERENT वा ४ FES OHO CHER ENE REN REU TOTES

Perform their functions. (35) Just as sparks cannot illumine, much less burn, fire (which is
their origin), the mind, speech, eye, intellect, life-breath and senses cannot grasp or reach
the ultimate Reality. The revealed word (Veda) too makes no positive assertion about Its
though itis the (only) authority for Its existence. By denying itself the power to describe It,
it speaks of It (merely) by import (inference). No negative description (however) would be
Possible if there were no Reality. (36) That which was one before creation became known
as Pradhana (or Prakrti) of triple nature, consisting of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Then by its
active power it became known as the Sutratma and by its power of understanding it became
known as the Mahat-tattva. (Again,) as a condition investing the Jiva or individual soul it
became known as Ahankara (the ego). The incomprehensible Brahma alone shines as the
deities presiding over the senses, the senses and the objects of senses and the experience
of pleasure and pain. The (gross) effect and the (subtle) cause are all Brahma, because It
is the Cause of both. (37) This Atma (Brahma) was never born and will never die, It neither
grows nor undergoes decay, because Itis the witness of the different states of those objects
which come into existence and die away. It is omnipresent and eternally abiding pure
consciousness; yet like Prana (life-breath) It appears as many under the influence of the
senses. (38) The vital air, as a matter of fact, follows everywhere the Jiva, whether born of
egg, womb, sweat or sprung out of soil, and itself remains unchanged in the different bodies.
(Even so) the Atma too remains unaffected (in the state of sound sleep) when the senses
are oblivious and also when the ego is dormant, 1e., the subtle body has become
functionless. (Its continuity even at that time is provedby the fact that) we remember the Atma
(on waking as the witness of the enjoyment of sound sleep). (39) Just as the light of the sun
shines to clear eyes, so the truth of the Self is directly revealed to the pure heart of the man
who is earnestly devoted to the Lord and intensely desires to obtain His holy feet, and has
thus freed his mind from the impurities born of qualities and actions. (40)

राजोवाच
कर्मयोगं वदत न: पुरुषो येन संस्कृत: । विधूयेहाशु कर्माणि नैष्कर्म्य विन्दते परम् ।४१।
एवं प्रश्नमृषीन् पूर्वमपृच्छं पितुरन्तिके । नाब्रुवन् ब्रह्मण: पुत्रास्तत्र कारणमुच्यताम् ॥४२।

The king submitted : (Pray) describe for us that Yoga of action through which man in
his present life soon destroys his Karma and, thus purified, attains that supreme knowledge
which follows dissociation from all actions. (41) Formerly, in the presence of my father
(Ikswaku) | put this question to the Rsis (Sanatkumara etc.); but those Rsis (sons of Brahma)
did not answer it. (Pray,) tell me why they did not reply. (42)

उवाच
कर्माकर्मविकर्मेति वेदवादो न लौकिक: । वेदस्य चेश्वरात्मत्वात् तत्र मुह्यन्ति सूरय: ।४३॥
परोक्षवादो वेदोऽयं बालानामनुश्ञासनम्। कर्ममोक्षाय कर्माणि fed ह्यगदं यथा ।४४॥
aR यस्तु aah स्वयमज्ञोऽजितेन्द्रिय: । विकर्मणा ह्यधर्मेण मृत्योर्मृत्युमुपैति स: ।४५॥
वेदोक्तमेव कुर्वाणो नि:सङ्गोऽर्पितमीश्वरे। demat लभते सिद्धिं रोचनार्था फलश्रुति: ।४६॥

Avirhotra said : Actions enjoined by the scriptures, prohibitions as opposed to the
former and transgressions of the prescribed ones are to be known only from the Vedas and
are not (mere) secular affairs; and as the Vedas are the revelations of God, (even) the
learned get confused in distinguishing the three kinds of actions. (If the Rsis did not reply to

your question, obviously the reason was that at that time you were a mere lad and would nct
have understood the answer.) (43) The Veda has a deeper import than what the words
