Dis. 13] BOOK ELEVEN 571

RORY OIRO EERIE CIOR शाक कक शाशा शारा DICE Earn SO Ire ROR EE UR VO Ra न् यक 8

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अहमित्यन्यथाबुद्धि प्रमत्तस्य यथा हदि। उत्सर्पति wit घोरं त्ततो dari मन: । ९ ।
रजोयुक्तस्य मनस: सङ्कल्प: सविकल्पक: | तत: कामो गुणध्यानाद् दु:सह: स्याद्धि GAA: 1१०।
करोति ama: कर्माण्यविजितेन्द्रिय: । दु:खोदर्काणि सम्पह्यन् रजोवेगविमोहित: । ११।
रजस्तमोभ्यां यदपि विद्वान् विक्षिप्तधी: ga: । अतन्दरितो मनो युञ्जन् दोषदृष्टिर्न सज्जते । १२।
अप्रमत्तोऽनुयुञ्जीत मनो मय्यर्पयञ्छनै: । अनिर्विण्णो यथाकालं जितश्वासो जितासन: 1931
एतावान् योग आदिष्टो मच्छिष्यै: सनकादिभि: | सर्वतो मन आकृष्य मय्यद्धाऽऽवेड्यते यथा ।१४॥

The glorious Lord replied : The perverted notion of "I" (with reference to the body etc.)
duly springs up in the heart of the deluded soul; due to such notion Rajas, which is the root
of sorrow, pervades the mind, even though the latter is born of Sattva. (9) In the mind,
coloured with Rajas, of a manof perverted judgment springs up (first of all) the notion about
an object being worth enjoying and (then) as to how it can be enjoyed. Next arises in him,
as a result of his dwelling on the excellent aspects of that object, a passion for it which is
indeed difficult to arrest. (10) Having no control over his senses and overpowered by desire,
the man embarks upon actions attended with sorrow) though clearly perceiving them to be
such, deluded as he is by the impetuosity of Rajas. (11) The man of discrimination, though
his mind (too) is (sometimes) distracted (and even infatuated) by Rajas and Tamas, collects
his mind again with effort, alive as he is to the evil inherent in the pleasures of sense, and
does not get attached to them. (12) Having controlled the breath and secured steadiness of
posture, and remaining alert and not feeling bored (in the event of success not coming within
sight soon) one should slowly compose the mind, concentrating it on Me at the appointed
time (thrice a day). (13) Withdrawing the mind from everything (else), it should be duly and
directly established in Me; this much comprises the Yoga taught (by Me} to Brahma
accompanied by My disciples, the sages Sanaka and others. (14)

उद्धव उवाच
यदा त्वं सनकादिभ्यो येन रूपेण Sea योगमादिष्टवानेतद् रूपमिच्छामि वेदितुम् । १५॥

Uddhava submitted : | wish to know about that form in which and when you taught
the Yoga to Sanaka and his three brothers, O Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord
Siva)! (15)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
पुत्रा हिरण्यगर्भस्य मानसा: सनकादय: । Uy: पितरं सूक्ष्मां योगस्यैकान्तिकीं गतिम् । १६॥

The glorious Lord replied : Sanaka and his brothers mind-born sons of Brahma (the
creator), questioned their father (once) about the unfailing and highest consummation of
Yoga, so difficult to understand. (16)

Wyte चेतो गुणाश्चेतसि च प्रभो । कथमन्योन्यसंत्यागो मुमुक्षोरतितितीर्षो: । १७।
Sanaka and others submitted : The mind clings to the sense-objects (by virtue of its
natural affinity to them) and the latter get imprinted on the mind (in the form of latencies), O

Lord! How canitbe possible for the seeker of Liberation, whois keen toreach the other shore,
to part them one from the other ? (17)
