३३4` SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

Shite री कीं toto sr पि क ह ने क ew eee HASSE HOT HCE AHH LET ES यैकप्ते क इ MERAH EERE SEH Ee
जन

प्रस्थिते तु वनं पित्रा दत्त्वा गां धर्मसंश्रय: | षदत्रिंशद्दर्षसाहस्रं रक्षिताव्याहतेन्द्रिय: 1221

त्वदभ्रातर्युत्तमे नष्टे मृगयायां तु तन्मना: | अन्वेषन्ती वनं माता दावाग्निं सा प्रवेक्ष्यति 1231

SBI मां यज्ञहृदयं Ga: पुष्कलदक्षिणै: | भुक्त्वा चेहाशिष: सत्या अन्ते मां संस्मरिष्यसि । २४॥

ततो गन्तासि मत्स्थानं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम्। उपरिष्टादृषिभ्यस्त्वं यतो नावर्तते Ta: । २५॥

The Lord said: | know the cherished desire of your heart, 0 Ksatriya boy. Although it
is difficult to attain, | grant it, O child of commendable vow. May prosperity wait on you. (19)
| bestowon you O blessed one, that effulgent and lasting abode which has not (So far) been
attained to by others. The entire stellar sphere—consisting of planets, lunar mansions
and (other) stars—stands fastened to it even as oxen employed in trampling corn are bound
to a post in the middle of a threshing-floor. It survives even those who live for a whole day
of Brahma (i.e., even after the dissolution of the three world—earth, heaven and the
intermediate region); nay, the stars presided over by Dharma (the god of piety), Agni (the
godoffire), KaSyapa (a lord of created beings) andthe seven Rsis, the Venus and other stars
too revolve round it, ever keepingit to their right. (20-21) (Even here) when your father retires
to the forest after handing over ( the dominion of) the earth (to you), you will rule over the
globe for a period of thirty-six thousand years, firmly established in righteousness and with
your senses (faculties) unimpaired. (22) Again, when your half-brother, Uttama, loses his life
in a hunting expedition, his mother (Suruci) will enter a forest fire while searching for him in
the forest, he being the only subject of her thought. (23) (You know) Yajfia (sacrifice) is My
beloved form. Therefore, worshipping Me through a number of sacrifices, in which liberal
fees will be paid (to the officiating priests), and having enjoyed true blessings in this life, you
will ultimately fix your thought (exclusively) on Me. (24) Thereby you will ascend to My abode,
which is adored by all other spheres andis situated even higher than (the abode of) theseven
Rsis (the Ursa Major), attaining to which one does not return (to this mortal world). (25)
मैत्रेय उवाच
gate: स भगवानतिदिश्यात्मन: पदम्। वबालस्य पर्यतो धाम स्वमगाद्गरुडध्वज: 1261
सोऽपि संकल्पजं विष्णो: पादसेवोपसादितम् ser संकल्पनिर्वाणं नातिप्रीतोऽभ्यगात्पुरम् | 29 |
Maitreya continued : Thus glorified (by Dhruva) and having promised to him (an abode
in) His own realm, the Lord, who bears the emblem of Garuda on His banner, rose to His own
abode, while the child stood gazing (in wonder) (26) The child was not very pleased even
after attaining his cherished object—which had been obtained through the worship of Lord
Visnu's feet, and had quenched (all) his desires (once for all)—and returned to the city (the
capital of his father). (27)
विदुर उवाच

लब्ध्वाप्यसिद्धार्थमिवैकजन्मना कथं स्वमात्मानममन्यतार्थवित् । २८।

Vidura said : How is it that Dhruva (who knew the real value of things) felt as if he had
not realized his object, even though he had secured in the course of a single life (a title to)
the supreme Abode of Sri Hari, the Lord of Maya (Prakrti), which is so very difficult to attain
and is earned solely through the worship of His feet ? (28)

मैत्रेय उवाच
भातु: सपत्नया arate विद्धस्तु तान् स्मरन् । नैच्छन्मुक्तिपतेर्मुक्तिं तस्मात्तापमुपेयिवान् 128 |

Maitreya replied : His heart having been pierced with the shaft-like words of his

stepmother and their memory still fresh (in his mind), Dhruva did not seek Mukti (final

