Dis. 90 } BOOK TEN 511

SEAIAMIT TERENAS ROK माश्वकक च् व आ आआ झआ मनकक-दज श्र ०9 आ म्न

smiles, (enlivening) jests and jokes and (loving) embraces captivated the heart of His
consorts. (13) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was the be-all andend-all of theirlives, the sole possessor
of their heart. Absorbed in the thought of their lotus-eyed Lord, they would remain speechless
for a while, and would suddenly break out with incoherent talks in the manner of a lunatic.
(In the intensity of their love} they would (now and then begin to experience excruciating pain
of separation from the Lord even in His presence and) give way delirious talks. | shall
reproduce these talks; (please) listen to them. (14)

महिष्य ऊचु:
कुररि विलपसि त्वं वीतनिद्रा न रोषे स्वपिति जगति रात्र्यामीश्वरो गुप्तबोध: |
व्रयमिव सखि कच्चिद् गाढनिर्भिन्नचेता नलिननयनहासोदारलीलेक्षितेन । १५॥

The queens said : 0 she-osprey, we are in the depth of the night now, and the whole
world appears to be one big void. The Lord Himself has buried His ever wakeful conscious-
ness (for the time being), and has gone to sleep. But your eyes know no sleep. Why do you
wail and lament thus, keeping awake for the whole night ? O friend, it seems your heart has
been pierced, equally with that of ours, by the (sweet) smiles and gracious and sportive
glances of the lotus-eyed Lord. Surely that is the reason why you do not get sleep. (15)

7 निमीलयसि नक्तमदृष्टबन्धुस्त्वं रोरवीषि करुणं aq चक्रवाकि ।
We wa वयमिवाच्युतपादजुष्टां किं वा स्रजं स्पृहयसे कबरेण वोढुम् । १६।
O red goose, why have you closed your eyes during the night ? Is it because your partner
has gone out of sight that you wail so piteously ? If so, we are really sorry for you. Oris it that

you are possessed like us with the desire of waiting upon the Lord, and long to adorn your
braid with the garland offered at the feet of the Lord ? (16)

भो od: सदा निष्टनसे उदन्वन्नलब्धनिद्रोऽधिगतप्रजागर: |
fe वा मुकुन्दापहतात्मलाञ्छन: प्राप्तां दर्शा त्वं च गतो दुरत्ययाम् । १७
००८९ you constantly roar and thunder. Do you get no sleep at all ? Itseems you have
developed the disease of insomnia.Or is it that our dear Lord has robbed you of the natural
qualities of tranquillity and gravity etc.? That is why, like us, you have developed a disease
which is so difficult to get rid of. (17)
त्वं यक्ष्मणा बलवतासि गृहीत इन्दो क्षीणस्तमो न निजदीधितिभि: क्षिणोषि ।
कच्चिन्मुकुन्दगदितानि यथा ad त्वं विस्मृत्य ot: स्थगितगीरुपलक्ष्यसे a: 120!
O moon, you have fallen a victim to the fell disease of consumption. Oh good gracious,
you have got so attenuated that you cannot disperse the darkness by your rays. (No, no;}

it seems the (sweet confidential) talks of our beloved Lord (Sri Krsna} have escaped out of
your memory, as out of ours. That is why you have become mute. (18)

-।किं त्वाचरितमस्माभिर्मलयानिल तेऽप्रियम्। गोविन्दापाङ्गनिर्भिन्ने हदीरयसि a: स्मरम् । १९।

O southern wind, what offence have we given you that you send impulses of love into our
heart, which is already torn to pieces by the sidelong glances of the Lord ? (19)
