620 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

PREM श E OE NEE METEOR NEE EEE CM ENTE COCKE NH TH OEE मा ककक SENN EN ANAT AEE e

existing in the organ of sight (which enables it to perceive light) is Adhidaiva. Everyone of
these (three) depends for its existence on the other two. That which exists in the sky (viz.,
the orb of the sun, however), being self-existent, is independent of these three. (Similarly)
since the Atma—being the cause of all these (Adhyatma etc.)—is (their witness and
therefore) different from them, (therefore) by virtue of its own (self-existent) conscious nature
illumines all illuminating agents (Adhyatma etc.). (Just as the eye has been shown above to
have three aspects.) the tactile sense, the auditory sense, the palate, the olfactory sense as
well as the intellect, the mind, the ego and the faculty of reason (also) should be (similarly)
understood to possess a threefold character. (31) The modification evolved out of the Mahat-
tattva—which has its root in Prakrti—through the instrumentality of Kala (the Time-Spirit) or
God, whois responsible for disturbing the equilibrium of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti),
viz., Ahankara (the cosmic ego), and which is of three kinds, viz., Vaikarika (Sattvika),
Tamasika and Aindriya (Rajasika), lies at the root of the notion of difference brought into
being by ignorance about the Self. (32) The controversy whether the Self as distinguished
from the body exists or not is the result of not realizing the Self. Though meaningless
(inasmuch as it is capable of being set at rest by Self-Realization) it does not cease in the
case of men whose mind is turned away from Me, their real Self. (33)
SEI उवाच
त्वत्त: परावृत्तधिय: स्वकृतै: कर्मभि: प्रभो । उच्चावचान् यथा देहान् गृह्णन्ति विसृजन्ति च । ३४॥
तन्ममाख्याहि गोविन्द दुर्विभाव्यमनात्मभि: । न dad प्रायशो लोके विद्वांस: सन्ति वञ्चिता: ।३५॥

Uddhava submitted : Tell me, 0 Protector of cows | how men whose mind is turned
away from You take and (then) give up corporeal forms, high and low, in conformity with
actions performed by themselves, O Lord! (in other words) how the omnipresent Self could
pass from one body to another, how actions could be ascribed to the actionless, and how
birth and death could be attributed to that which is beyond birth and death. itis a thing which
cannot be easily conceived by men of poor understanding; for, generally speaking there
are none in the world who are conversant with this topic, deluded as people are (by Your

Maya). (34-35)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मन: wind नॄणामिन्दियै: पञ्चभिर्युतम्। लोकाल्लोकं प्रयात्यन्य आत्मा तदनुवर्तते 1361
ध्यायन् मनोऽनु विषयान् दृष्टान् वानुश्रुतानथ | उद्यत् सीदत् कर्मतन्त्रं स्मृतिस्तदनु शाम्यति sae!
विषयाभिनिवेशोन नात्मानं यत् स्मरेत् पुन: । जन्तोर्वै कस्यचिद्धेतोर्मृत्युरत्यन्तविस्मृति: । ३८॥
जन्म त्वात्पतया ga: सर्वभावेन भूरिद। favorit प्राहुर्यथा स्वप्नमनोरथ: ।३९॥
स्वप्नं wiv da wd न स्मरत्यसौ । तत्र पूर्वमिवात्मानमपूर्वं चानुपञ्यति ।४०॥
इन्दियायनसृष्ट्येदं त्रैविध्यं भाति वस्तुनि । बहिरन्तर्भिदाहेतुर्जनोऽसज्जनकृद् यथा ।४१॥
नित्यदा ह्यङ्ग भूतानि भवन्ति न भवन्ति च । कालेनालक्ष्यवेगेन सूक्ष्मत्वात्तन्न दृश्यते ।४२॥
यथार्चिषां स्रोतसां च फलानां वा वनस्पते: । तथैव सर्वभूतानां वयोऽवस्थादय: कृता: ।४३॥
सोऽयं दीपोऽर्चिषां यद्वत् स्रोतसां तदिदं जलम् । सोऽयं पुमानिति नॄणां मृषा गीर्धीर्मृषायुषाम् ।४४॥
मा स्वस्य कर्मबीजेन जायते सोऽप्ययं पुमान्। म्रियते वामरो wre यथाम्निर्दारुसंयुत: ret
The glorious Lord replied ; United with the five senses (as well as with the five organs
of action and the five subtle elements), the mind of the Jivas, consisting as it does of latencies

of Karma, travels from one body to another; and the soul, though distinct from it, follows it
(identified as it is with that mind). (36) Being under the sway of Karma (destiny which
