534 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

PROCC COTTRELL CONT TEL गक शा क ERASER EERE CERO TH OE HERE RA ELL GTO शाशा काजा ४ सा मा

श्रिया विभूत्याभिजनेन विद्यया त्यागेन eam बलेन कर्मणा ।

जातस्मयेनान्धधिय: सहेश्वरान् सतोऽवमन्यन्ति हरिप्रियान् खला: । ९ ।

सर्वेषु शाश्वत्तनुभृत्स्ववस्थितॆ यथा रखमात्मानमभीष्टमीश्वरम् ।

वेदोपगीतं च न शृण्वतेऽबुधा मनोरथानां प्रवदन्ति वार्तया । १०॥

लोके व्यवायामिषमद्यसेवा नित्यास्तु wit हि तत्र det)

व्यवस्थितिस्तेषु विवाहयज्ञसुराग्रहैरासु निवृत्तिरिष्टा । ११।

धन च धर्मैकफलें यतो a ज्ञाने सविज्ञानमनुप्रश्नान्ति ।

गृहेषु युञ्जन्ति कलेवरस्य मृत्युं न wate दुरन्तवीर्यम् ।१२।

aq घ्राणभक्षो fafa: सुरायास्तथा wae न हिंसा ।

एवं व्यवाय: प्रजया न wr इमं faa न विदु: स्वधर्मम् ।१३॥
a त्वनेवंविदोऽसन्त: स्तब्धा: सदभिमानिन: । wy द्रुह्यन्ति विस्रब्धा: प्रेत्य खादन्ति ते च तान् । १४॥
fara: परकायेषु स्वात्मानं हरिमीश्वरम्। मृतके सानुबन्धेऽस्मिन् बद्धस्रेहा: पतन्त्यध: ।१५॥
a कैवल्यमसम्प्राप्ता ये चातीताश्च मूढताम् ।त्रैवर्गिका ह्यक्षणिका आत्मानं घातयन्ति Fe!
एत आत्महनोऽशान्ता अज्ञाने ज्ञानमानिन: । सीदन्त्यकृतकृत्या वै कालध्वस्तमनोरथा: 1291
हित्वात्यायासरचिता गृहापत्यसुहच्छ्रय: । तमो विशान्त्यनिच्छन्तो वासुदेवपराङ्मुखा: । १८॥

Camasa replied : From the mouth, arms, thighs and feet of the Lord were (respectively)
evolved the four Varnas or castes with the (four) ASramas or stages in life. And they were
distinctly divided into Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and Sudras according to their Gunas
(or qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and their combinations). (2) Among these they who
do not adore the Supreme Person though knowing Him to be their direct Originator and Ruler
and ignore Him, fall from their status and go down tohell. (3) Many women, Sudras andothers
are remote from (through neglect or distaste) hearing the Lord's stories or discourses on
them and also from singing His praises, and deserve to be pitied by devotees like you. (It
should be your duty to bring them to the right path). (4) Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaigyas
stand (very) near the feet of Sri Hari by virtue of their birthand Vedic Samskaras (ceremonies
for the twice-born). Yet they get misguided by the Vedas as they miss their real meaning and
interpret them literally about the fruits of actions. (5) They do not know the secret of action;
though foolish, they consider themselves learned andbecome conceited; they indulge in fine
talk and are fascinated by the honeyed words describing the transient fruit of actions. (6)
Being dominated by Rajas they resolve upon cruel deeds; their desire for pleasures is
insatiable; their anger is like that of a serpent and they love ostentation and show pride. Such
sinners laugh at the devotees of the Lord. (7) Living in homes where sexual pleasures
predominate, they remain devoted to women and talk among themselves of the pleasures
of sense (alone). They perform sacrifices without observing the rules and without distributing
food and giving money to the Brahmanas and only kill animals for sustenance, not realizing
the sin involved in destruction of life. (8) Blinded with pride born of their wealth and power,
pedigree and learning, munificence, comeliness of form, physical strength and actions,
those wicked men despise not only the saintly, who are beloved of Sri Hari, but the Lord
Himself. (9) Those fools do not heed what the Vedas say about the Lord, viz., that like the sky
He is eternally presentinall creatures as their very Self andas the ultimate object of allhuman
Pursuits. They interpret the Vedas as discussing only the objects of desire. (10) Man is
naturally inclined towards the enjoyment of sexual pleasure, flesh and wine. No rules enjoin
him to indulge in them. A certain check is provided over these tendencies (by the Sastra) by

