216 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

SHEHAKEEHEA HOH उ कजा क डज कीं ELL TAECERELEWELOETHET EEE HEHE He ee eo ot See ee
HE ENE SE REM E ROSE RECS SCE

अभिष्टुतो fargn प्रसूनैरापूर्यमाणो = fage: पहयतोऽरे: । ८ ।
. fab . । ———
मर्माण्यभीक्ष्णं प्रतुदन्तं दुरुक्तै: प्रचण्डमन्यु: प्रहसंस्तं बभाषे । ९ ।

The Lord placed the earth on the surface of the water within His sight and transferred to
her His own energy in the form of capacity to support herself on the water, while the enemy
stood looking on and while Brahma (the creator of the universe) extolled Him and the (other)
gods rained flowers on Him. (8) The Lord now displayed a terrible rage and spoke laughing
to the demon, who was now close upon Him, armed with a mighty mace, nay, who was
adorned with gold ornaments and protected by a queer armour of gold, and had all along
been cutting Him to the quick by his abusive words. (9)

MATA TAT
wat at भो वनगोचरा ym युष्मद्विधान्मृगये oomfter
न yea: प्रतिमुक्तस्य वीरा famed तव गृह्णन्त्यभद्र । १०॥
एते at न्यासहरा रसौकसां गतह्रियो गदया द्रावितास्ते ।
तिष्ठामहेऽथापि कथञ्चिदाजो स्थेयं क्व ant बलिनोत्पाद्य amie
त्वं want fee यूथपाधिपो wee नोऽस्वस्तय are: |
संस्थाप्य चास्मान् प्रमृजाश्रु स्वकानां य: Bi प्रतिज्ञां नातिपिपर्त्यसभ्य: 1221
The Lord said : Indeed we are wild brutes, 0 wretch, looking about for dogs like you.
Heroes take no notice of your braggadocio, bound as you are with the cords of Death. (10)
Scared away by your mace, we, who have stolen the charge of the dwellers in Rasatala,
stand here, casting allshame to the winds. Yet willy-nilly we must take our stand on the battle-
field; for, having brought about enmity with a powerful adversary, where can we go ? (11)
A leader of leaders of foot soldiers as you are, take prompt steps to overthrow us, giving up

all hitch, and wipe the tears of your kith and kin by slaying us; for he does not deserve a seat
in an assembly (of good people), who fails to redeem his plighted word. (12)

मैत्रेय उवाच
सोऽधिक्षिप्तो भगवता प्रलब्धश्च SAT भृशम्। आजहारोल्बणं क्रोधं क्रीड्यमानोऽहिराडिव 1231
सृजन्नमर्षित: श्चासान्मन्युप्रचलितेन्द्रिय: | आसाद्य तरसा eal गदयाभ्यहनद्धरिम् । १४॥
भगवांस्तु wat fags रिपुणोरसि । अवञ्जयत्तिरश्चीनो योगारूढ इवान्तकम् ।१५॥
पुनर्गदां स्वामादाय भ्रामयन्तमभीक्ष्णश:। अभ्यधावद्धरि: me: संरम्भाद्दष्टदच्छदम् ।१६॥
aay गदयारातिं दक्षिणस्यां भ्रुवि प्रभु:। आजघ्ने स तु तां सौम्य गदया कोविदोऽहनत् । १७॥
एवं Tena गुर्वीभ्यां हर्यक्षो eta च । जिगीषवा सुसंरब्धावन्योन्यमभिजघ्नतु: ie!
तयो: स्पृधोस्तिग्मगदाहताङ्गयो: क्षतास्त्रवघ्राणविवृद्धमन्व्वो: |
विचित्रमार्गांश्चरतोर्जिगीषया व्यभादिलायामिव शुष्मिणोर्मृध: । १९॥
कौरव्य मह्यां द्विषतोर्विमर्दने दिदृक्षुरागादृषिभिर्वृततर स्वराद् । २०॥
विलक्ष्य tat भगवान् सहस्रणीर्जगाद नारायणमादिसूकरम् ।२१॥

Maitreya continued : Severely taunted and ridiculed by the ॥ 016॥1 an angry mood, he
