208 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

VHAHKKOOKHEMCHRHHLKCCHRAEKTECRELCETAAKEUTHRSTS ORES EYE EE TEHV EECA KEKE त् CVE EAEN EK

The Lord said : These attendants of Mine, Jaya and Vijaya by name, have committed
a great offence against you, ignoring Me (at the same time). (2) The punishment that has
been meted out to them by you, who are so devoted to Me, is approved of by Me, O good
sages, inasmuch as the offence against you constitutes an affront to Me. (3) The Brahmana
is My highest deity and the disrespect that has been shown to you by My own people, | take
it as an offence committed by Myself; hence | crave your forgiveness for the same on this
occasion. (4) On a servant doing a wrong the world (generally) blames his master (for the
same) and the disrepute thus brought to him tarnishes his fair name even as white leprosy
disfigures the skin. (5) (You know) the whole world down to the pariah (who cooks and lives
by the flesh of a dog) is immediately purified by a dip taken through the ear into the nectar
of My unsullied glory. But it is from you (the Brahmanas) that | have derived this highly
sanctifying renown. Therefore, irresistible as | am, | will not hesitate to lop off My own arm
if its conduct is found hostile to you. (6) Because of My services to you the dust of My lotus-
feethas become so sacred that itimmediately wipes outall sinand! have acquireda disposition
on account of which Sri (the goddess of fortune) leaves Me not, even though | have no
attachment to Her, while others (including the highest gods such as Brahma and so on)
observe sacred vows for securing even a sidelong glance from Her. (7) | do not enjoy the
oblations offered by the sacrificer in a sacrifice through the sacrificial fire, which is one of My
own mouths, with the same relish as | eat the delicacies overflowing with ghee through the
mouth of the Brahmana who, having dedicated the consequences of his actions to Me, is ever
satisfied (with his lot) and relishes every morsel he takes. (8) The power of My Yogamaya
(wonderful divine energy) is infinite and unobstructed, and the water in which My feet have
been washed (viz., the holy Gariga) quickly sanctifies all the three worlds along with Lord
Siva (who bears her on His head). Yet even | bear on My crown the holy dust of the
Brahmanas' feet ! Who would not, under the circumstances, bear with them ? (9) The
Brahmanas, the cows (that yield materials for sacrificial offerings) and defenceless crea-
tures are My own bodies. The vulture-like messengers of Yama, the god of punishment
appointed by Me, whoare furious as serpents, angrily tear with their bills those who look upon
these (My bodies) as distinct from Me, their faculty of judgment having been impaired by that
sin. (10) On the other hand, they captivate My heart, who with a gladdened heart and with
their lotus face enlivened by a nectar-like smile respect the Brahmanas—even though they
utter harsh words—looking upon them as My own selves, and pacify them by praising them
in loving words even as a son would appease an angry father or as | am pacifying you. (11)
These servants of Mine thus trespassed against you without knowing the mind of their
master (Myself). | shall, therefore, deem it a favour done to Me if you so ordain that, reaping
the fruit of their transgression they may return to My presence soon—that the term of their
exile from My abode may expire before long. (12)

FATT
अथ तस्योशतीं देवीमृषिकुल्यां सरस्वतीम्।नास्वाद्य मन्युदष्टानां तेषामात्माप्यतृप्यत 1231
सतीं व्यादाय श्रृण्वन्तो लघ्वीं गुर्वर्थगह्वराम्। विगाह्यागाधगम्भीरां न विदुस्तच्चिकीर्षितम् । १४॥
a योगमाययाऽऽरब्धपारमेष्ठ्यमहोदयम् | प्रोचु: प्राञ्लयो विप्रा: प्रहष्टा: क्षुभितत्वच: 184 |
Brahma continued : Even though the sages had been bitten by the serpent of anger,
their soul was not sated with hearing the Lord's lovely and illuminating speech, which was
like a series of Mantras (sacred texts). (13) Though brief, the Lord's excellent speech was

difficult to comprehend because of its momentous import and was most profound in
significance. The sages heard it with wide open (attentive) ears and pondered it as well; yet
