Dis. 16 ] BOOK EIGHT 803

PHESCAAELL शे द्धै शे झ RS AAWHELELAR AE AAA शे शॆक्तै SETHE R AARON ETEEEAHHAAHHMOHEEEE AAA HHRHR
भुञ्जीत daa: we Ae: सभाजितै: । ब्रह्मचार्यथ तद्रात्र्यां se प्रथमेऽहनि ।४४॥
am: झयुचिर्यथोक्तेन विधिना सुसमाहित: । पयसा स्नापयित्वार्चेद् यावद्वरतसमापनम् ।४५॥
पयोभक्षो safe ate विष्ण्वर्चनादृत: । पूर्ववज्जुहुयादग्निं ब्राह्मणांश्चापि भोजयेत् ।४६॥
एवं wee: Hae द्वादशाहं पयोव्रत: । हरेराराधनं होममर्हणं द्विजतर्पणम् ।४७॥
Imbued with reverence, he should wait upon Lord Visnu (the Controller of the senses)
with water for washing the feet and rinsing the mouth with and other articles of worship, after
His presence has been secured through invocation by (reciting) the aforesaid Mantras
(sacred texts). (38) Having decorated the Lord with sandal-paste, flowers and so on, he
should bathe Him with milk. Then he should deck Him with raiment, a sacred thread and
ornaments and wait upon Him (once more) with water for washing His feet and rinsing His
mouth with, sandal-paste, burnt incense and so on, reciting the twelve-syllabled Mantra
(while offering all these articles of worship). (39) Offering (to the Deity), by way of repast, rice
boiled in milk with clarified butter and jaggery, if there is wealth enough(to do so and if not,
any simple diet), he should pour it into the sacred fire (as well), uttering the Mantra sacred
to the Lord (the twelve-syllabled Mantra). (40) He should give the food (thus) offered (entirely)
to some devotee or take (a part of) it himself (at the end of the worship after distributing the
rest among those present at the (function). And (then) giving water for rinsing the mouth with,
he should offer betel-leaves after seasoning them (with areca-nut parings, catechu, lime,
cardamom seeds, dried cloves and so on). (41) He should (now) mutter the Mantra one
hundred and eight times, glorify the Lord by means of (the aforesaid and other) praises and,
circumambulating Him clock-wise, should fall prostrate on the ground (before Him) with
delight. (42) Placing on his head (as a mark of reverence) the offerings (flowers etc.), kept
before the Deity, he should then (respectfully) allow the Deity toretire. He should (afterwards)
properly feed at least a couple of Brahmanas with rice boiled in milk with sugar etc. (43)
Permitted by those Brahmanas, (duly) honoured (by him by offering a wreath of flowers,
betel-leaves, giftof money and so on), he should share the remnant (of food) with his beloved
ones and observe (strict) continence on that night. Having taken his bath the following
morning, (viz.,) on the first day (of the bright half), and remaining undefiled and fully
composed, he should bathe the Deity with milk and worship Him according to the procedure
mentioned before*(and should continue to do so from day to day) till the end of the vow. (44-45)
Full of reverence for the worship of Lord Visnu, he should observe this vow, subsisting on
milk (alone). As before (on the previous day) he should pour oblations into the (sacred) fire
and feed the Brahmanas as well. (46) (Strictly) observing the vow of a milk diet, he should
n this way daily practise for full twelve days adoration of Lord Sri Hari (in the form of extolling
Him, bowing to Him and muttering prayers to Him), offer oblations into the sacred fire,
worship His image and feed the Brahmanas.(47)
प्रतिपद्दिनमारभ्य चावक्छुक्लत्रयोदशी | ब्रह्मचर्यमध:स्वप्नं स्नानं त्रिषवणं ATs
वर्जयेदसदालापं भोगानुच्चावचांस्तथा | अहिंस्रर सर्वभूतानां वासुदेवपरायण: ।४९॥
त्रयोदश्यामथो विष्णो: aot vga: | कारयेच्छास्त्रदृष्टेने विधिना विधिकोविदै: 1401
Wat च महतीं pate वित्तशाढ्यविवर्जित: । चरुं निरूप्य पयसि शिषिविष्टाय विष्णवे । ५१
qt तेन पुरुषं यजेत सुसमाहित:।नैवेद्यं चातिगुणवद् दद्यात्पुरुषतुष्टिदम् 421
आचार्यं FAT seg: | तोषयेदृत्विजश्चैव तद्बिद्धयाराधनं हरे: 1431
भोजयेत् तान् गुणवता सदन्नेन शुचिस्मिते। अन्यांश्च ब्राह्मणाञ्छक्त्या ये च तत्र समागता: । ५४॥

* Vide verses 38 and 39 above.
