Dis. 29 ] BOOK FOUR 427

We Mr Be Re We We wy es He We we Be He Hr He HT SOMO क त्येरो RT Be BRT RE ST TRE ज्जी ORT ONT ERE MRE RE ERE HE POR RON ROMER RET HE RL BER We We He RENT

gia वेदविदां are: श्रूयते aa aa ह। कर्म यत्करियते प्रोक्तं परोक्षं न wer ।५९॥

King Pracinabarhi said : | have heard and pondered, 0 holy sage, on what you have
said. (Surely) my preceptors (who instructed me in the rituals) are not aware of this: (for) had
they known it, wherefore should they have failed to teach the same to me? (56) The great
doubt raised in my mind by their words on this subject has been fully resolved (by you), O
(worthy) Brahmana. Even sages are bewildered in a domain which is beyond the reach of
the senses. (57) Leaving here the body by which the Jiva performs (certain) actions, he reaps
the (good and evil) consequences (of those actions) ina future life through another body.(58)
This doctrine of the knowers of Veda is heard of everywhere. (But how can this be i)
(Moreover) whatever action, recommended in the Vedas, is (actually) performed goes out
of sight and is no longer visible. (How can a thing which has altogether disappeared yield
good or evil consequences?) (59) ।

नारद उवाच

येनैवारभते कर्म तेनैवामुत्र तत्पुमान्। भुङ्क्ते ह्यव्यवधानेन लिङ्गेन मनसा स्वयम् । ६०॥
शयानमिममुत्सृज्य श्वसन्तं पुरुषो यथा । कर्मात्मन्याहितं भुङ्क्ते तादृशेनेतरेण वा eel
ममैते मनसा यद्यदसावहमिति ब्रुवन्। गृह्णीयात्तत्पुमान् wa कर्म येन पुनर्भव: 1621
यथानुमीयते चित्तमुभयैरिन्दियेहिते: । एवं प्राग्देहजं कर्म लक्ष्यते चित्तवृत्तिभि: । ६३॥
नानुभूतं कछ्व चानेन देहेनादृष्टमश्रुतम्। कदाचिदुपलभ्येत यद्रूपं यादृगात्मनि । ex
तेनास्य weet wifes teaser श्रद्धत्स्वाननुभूतोऽर्थो न मन: स्प्रष्टुमर्हति 1&4 1

Narada replied : The Jiva itself experiences (the good and evil) consequences of its
actions hereafter through the same subtle body, (mainly consisting of) the mind, by which
he performs (those) actions and which continues uninterrupted (even in the lives to
come).(60) Just as (in a dream) a man ceases to identify himself with this (physical body)—
which remains lying asleep and breathing (as heretofore)—and experiences the fruit of his
actions, which are stored in his mind (in the form of impressions), so does he reap the fruit
of his actions done in a previous life through another body similar to this or belonging to a
different species. (61) Whatever body the Jiva cleaves to with his mind, saying: “These (wife
and children) are mine and this (body) is |", he (also) ascribes to himself the actions
performed through that body, whence follows his rebirth. (62) Just as (the existence of) a
(directing) mind is inferred from both the types of activities of the Indriyas (viz., perception
of the objective world and reacting upon the same), so are the actions wrought through a
previous body (and surviving in the form of impressions) inferred from the (diverse)
propensities of the mind. (63) What has nowhere been experienced and is unseen and
unheard of in this life is sometimes perceived with the mind in its actual form and character
(in a dream ora reverie). (64) Therefore, O king, be positive in your mind that such an object
was experienced in a previous life by that Jiva identified with a subtle body; for an object that
has not been experienced (before) can never (even) flash on the mind. (65)

मन Te मनुष्यस्य पूर्वरूपाणि sofa भविष्यतश्च wg ते ada न भविष्यत: । ६६॥

अदृष्टमश्रुतं चात्र we दृश्यते। यथा तथानुमन्तव्यं देशकालक्रियाश्रयम् । ६७॥
सर्वे क्रमानुरोधेन मनसीन्दियगोचरा: | आयान्ति ofan यान्ति सर्वे समनसो जना: । ६८॥
सत्त्वैकनिष्ठे मनसि भगवत्पार्श्ववर्तिनि | तमश्चन्द्रमसीवेदमुपरज्यावभासते । ६९1
नाहं ममेति भावोऽयं पुरुषे व्यवधीयते । यावद् बुद्धिमनोऽक्षार्थगुणव्यूहो ह्यनादिमान् vo!
सुप्तिमूरच्छोपतापेषु प्राणायनविघातत: । नेहतेऽहमिति ज्ञानं मृत्युप्रज्वारयोरपि ।७१॥
गर्भे बाल्येऽप्यपौष्कल्यादिकादशविधं तदा । लिङ्गं न दृश्यते यून: Hel चन्द्रमसो यथा 12

