Dis. 21 ] BOOK ELEVEN 611

EHR OO EHTEL ERE E OLN ORO माशा ONE क ERT HE ET ONE KE त्क २०१ ६७०० १ ०२० ५१० ७१ नन

a particular substance, by creating a doubt (in one’s mind) about it. (3) (Of these) purity and
impurity are determined for the purpose of knowing the righteous way as distinguished from
the unrighteous; virtue and fault are defined in order to regulate usage (what is intrinsically
good is used in exceptional cases notwithstanding its impurity); and good and evil conse-
quences are determined in order to enable one to make one's living (one is permitted to use
an impure substance in exceptional circumstances only to the extentnecessary for maintain-
ing one’s existence), O sinless one ! Such a course of conduct has been shown by Me (in
the form of Manu andother divine Law-givers) for men bearing the responsibility of upholding
the cause of virtue. (4) Earth, water, fire, the air and etherthese five elements coupled with
the Self (Spirit) enter into the constitution of the bodies of all created beings from Brahma (the
foremost of created beings) down to the immobile creation (the plant or vegetable kingdom,
the lowest species of life). (That is to say, all created beings are one in point of the material
stuff of which they are constituted as well as in point of their Jivahood or spiritual essence),(5)
(Yet) in order to enable these creatures (by regulating their activity) to attain their purpose
(of life in the form of Dharma or religious merit, Artha or material possessions, Kama or
gratification of the senses and Moksa or final beatitude) diverse names and forms (viz.,
Brahmana, Ksatriya and so on) are invented by the Vedas with reference to the bodies
though made up of the same substance, O Uddhava! (6) In order (however) to regulate the
activities (of created beings) goodness and otherwise are attributed by Me (inthe form of the
Vedas) even to entities like space and time (including the fruit and motive of actions, as well
as those qualified for various types of actions), nay, to substances, O most noble one! (7)
Of (all) tracts of land, that which is untrodden by the black deer is unholy, more so that which
is lacking in devotion to the Brahmanas. Even that which is hallowed by the presence of the
black deer is unholy if destitute of righteous men. The tract known by the name of Kikata
(comprising the territories of Anga, Vanga and Kalinga‘, roughly corresponding to the
modern district of Bhagalpur in Bihar and the states of Bengal and Utkala) is unholy if not
inhabited by good men. +The land mostly inhabited by Mlecchas ¢ and barren land (too) is
likewise) unholy. (8) (A period of) time which is fit for the performance of righteous actions
from the point of view of (adequate supply of) requisite articles or by itself is valuable (from
that point of view); whereas ( a period of) time in which a (sacred) rite (already commenced)
has to be abandoned (for scarcity of requisite materials or political upheaval) and (even so)
that which is declared as unifit for any (religious) rite (due to impurity occasioned by the death
of a blood relation or other near relative or childbirth in one's own house or family) is
impure.(9) The purity and impurity of a substance are brought about by another substance
as well as by the word of mouth (of a Brahmana), by a purificatory process (and otherwise),
nay, by (flux of) time§ and by largeness and smallness of area respectively (as in the case
nn EEE

* A Smrti text says:—

अङ्गवङ्गकलिङ्गेषु सौगाष्टरमगधेषु च । तोर्थयात्रां विता गत्वा पुन: संस्कारमर्हति ॥

"One travelling in the territories of Anga, Vanga and Kalinga, Saurastre and Magadha except on a pilgrimage deserves
to undergo the rite of investiture with the sacreo thread once more.”

* स वै पुण्यतमो देश: सत्याजरं यत्र fre ।

“ That land indeed is most holy where :esides a noble and deserving person !*

¢ In the Baudhayana-Smirll a Mieccha has been characterized as follows —

गोर्मांसखादका यस्नु fares ag भाषते । सर्वांचारवहोनश्च ers इत्यभिधीयते॥

“ He is called a Mieccha, who eats the bovine flesh, speaks much that is seif-contradictory and 1s destitute of all good
conduct *

§ A Smrti text says:—

कालॆ मेघोदकं oe) aed तु ज्यहमेव हि । अकाले दशरात्रं Paaa: शद्धिर्विधोयते ॥
