128 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

WRC Ma HH A ती क Leaner nennse th ertereerhheh threcerereehih tri eeereesseees esse ee eeeeeeesse

of action, and the mind, the ego and the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence)
due to disturbance in the equilibrium (and the resultant transformation) of the three Gunas
or modes of Prakrti, brought about by the will of God, has been spoken of as 'Sarga’; and the
creation of animate and inanimate beings by Brahma (himself born of the Cosmic Being) is
called Visarga. (3) The triumph of the Lord (as revealed by the fact that living beings created
by Him keep within their bounds) is known by the name of 'Sthiti' and the Lord's grace on
His devotees is termed as ‘Posana'. Again, the virtuous conduct of the saintly Manus
(presiding over the different Manvantaras) has been referred to by the term ‘Manvantaras’;
_while the latent desires of the various creatures, which lead to their bondage
through interested action,are known as 'Utis'. (4) Even so the life-accounts of the various
manifestations of Sri Hari as well as of His saintly devotees, supplemented by various other
stories, have been termed as ‘lSakathas’. (5) ‘Nirodha' means the withdrawal of the individual
soul with all its qualifications or adjuncts into the Lord subsequent to His retirement (falling
into Yoganidra). And when the Jiva relinquishes its assumed character (doership etc.) and
realizes its true nature (Branmahood), they call it ‘Mukti or emancipation of the soul. (6)
Finally, that from which are known to proceed the creation, preservation and dissolution (of
the universe) is what they call ‘the 'Agraya', which is spoken of (in the scriptures) as the
supreme Brahma or the supreme Spirit (Paramatma). (7) The same perceiving subject (the
individual soul) which identifies itself with the sense of perception also exists in the form of
the deities presiding over the senses of perception (the sun-god and others); while the
physical body, which distinguishes the senses from the deities presiding over them, serves
as the condition (Upadhi) of the individual soul. (8) When itis clear that in the absence of
anyone of these we cannot perceive the other two, it follows that He (God) who knows all
these three is the ‘Agraya’ or support of all and this latter has no other support than
Himself. (9)
पुरुषोऽण्डं विनिर्भिद्य यदासौ स विनिर्गत:। आत्मनोऽयनमन्विच्छन्नपोऽस्राक्षीच्छुचि: शुची: 180 |
तास्ववात्सीत् Bae सहस्रपरिवत्सरान्। तेन नारायणो AT यदाप: पुरुषोद्धवा: । ११।
द्रव्यं कर्म च wes स्वभावो जीव एव च । यदनुग्रहत: सन्ति न ara यदुपेक्षया । १२॥
एकोनानात्वमन्विच्छन्योगतल्यातसमुत्थित:।व्रीर्यंहिरण्मयं देवो मायया व्यसृजत् Frat 1१३॥
अधिदैवमथाध्यात्ममधिभूतमिति प्रभु:। यथैकं dred वीर्यं त्रिधाभिद्यत तच्छृणु es!
When the aforesaid Cosmic Being emerged-from the egg-shaped universe and stood
apart, He began to look out for a foothold tor Himself; and with this object in view that Being
of pure intentions created the holy waters. (10) Having evolved from the Supreme Person
(also called Nara’) these waters were knownas ‘Nara’ (that which proceeds from '‘Nara’); and
since He lived on these waters of His own creation for a thousand (celestial) years He
became known as Narayana (He who resides in the 'Nara’). (11) The gross elements (the
material of which this universe is made), Karma (the destiny of the Jivas), Time, the mutability
of Matter and the Jivas exist only by His grace and cease to exist the moment He grows
indifferent towards them. (12) Awaking from His Yoganidra (deep trance), Lord Narayana,
who was all alone (till this moment), now sought to multiply Himself and by dint of His Maya
(wonderful energy) split up His effulgent seed-body into three parts—the Adhidaiva, the
Adhyatma and the Adhibhita. Hear now (O Pariksit !) how the unitary energy of the Lord
came to be divided into three parts. (13-14)

अन्त:शरीर आकाश्ञात् पुरुषस्य विचेष्टत: | ओज: सहो बलं जज्ञे तत: प्राणो महानसु: 124 |
अनुप्राणन्ति चं प्राणा: प्राणन्तं सर्वजन्तुषु। अपानन्तमपानन्ति नरदेवमिवानुगा: 1१६1
प्राणेन क्षिपता क्षुत् तूडन्तरा aaa wet: पिपासतो जक्षतश्च प्राङ्मुखं निरभिद्यत । १७।
