—_— ०० >>> ।

Dis. 88] BOOK TEN 499

SHOT CE TOES E Ne eN MANATEE EHP Ke ORAL ELA Sper enhnerAnhhstentsseenernenwean sesh

अथाष्टाशीतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXXVIII

Lord Rudra rescued (from trouble)

राजोवाच
देवासुरमनुष्येषु ये भजन्त्यशिवं fra प्रायस्ते धनिनो भोजा न तु लक्ष्म्या: पतिं हरिम् । १ ।
एतद् वेदितुमिच्छाम: सन्देहोऽत्र महान् हि न: । विरुद्धशीलयो: प्रभ्वोर्विरुद्धा भजतां गति: । २ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Those among the gods, demons and men that worship
Lord Siva, who has spurned all enjoyments, are generally found to be wealthy and enjoying
the pleasures of sense; but not so those who are devoted to Lord Visnu (the Spouse of the
goddess of wealth and consequently endowed with all enjoyments). (1) We are (according)
eager to know how itis that the lot of those worshipping the two (Lord Siva and Lord Visnu)
of contrary disposition is (quite) the opposite (of what might be expected). Great indeed is
our doubt on this point. (2)

श्रीगुक उवाच

faa: हाक्तियुत: हाश्वत् त्रिलिङ्गो गुणसंवृत: । वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्चेत्यहं त्रिधा । ३ ।
aa विकारा अभवन् षोडझामीषु agai उपधावन् विभूतीनां सर्वासामश्नुते गतिम् x ।
हरिर्हि निर्गुण: साक्षात् पुरुष: प्रकृते: पर: । स सर्वदृगुपद्रष्टा तं भजन् निर्गुणो waa ५ ।
निवृत्तेष्रश्चमेघेषु राजा युष्मत्पितामह:। शृण्वन् भगवतो धर्मानपृच्छदिदमच्युतम् । ६ ।
स ae भगवांस्तस्मै sia: Gee प्रभु: । नृणां नि:श्रेयसार्थाय योऽवतीर्णो यदो: कुले । ७ ।

Sri Suka replied : (Pariksit!) Lord Siva ever remains united with His Sakti (Energy). He
is invested with the three Gunas and is the deity presiding over Ahankara (the Cosmic Ego),
which is threefold (in character), viz., Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika. (3) Out of these three
varieties of Ahankara are evolved the sixteen final evolutes (viz., the mind from the Sattvika
type, the ten Indriyas from Rajasika and the five gross elements from the amasika). He
who worships the deity presiding over anyone of these obtains access to all forms of (earthly)
prosperity. (4) Lord Visnu, on the other hand, is the Supreme Person Himself, (far) beyond
Prakrti and devoid of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), He is omniscient and the witness
(of all hearts). Anyone worshipping Him is rid of the (three) Gunas. (5) (Pariksit !) at the
conclusion of the Agwamedha sacrifices your grandfather, King Yudhisthira, while listening
from (the lips of) the Lordtoan exposition of (the various types of) sacred duties put this (very)
question to Sri Krsna. (6) (Pariksit!) Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, who appeared in the race
of Yadu for ensuring the highest good of men, felt (much) pleased (to hear the question) and
spoke to the king, who was eager to listen (in the following strain).(7)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
यस्याहमनुगृह्णामि हरिष्ये तद्धेनं | ततोऽधनं त्यजन्त्यस्य स्वजना Gag fea । ८ ।
a यदा वितथोद्योगो निर्विण्ण: स्याद् धनेहया । मत्परै: कृतमैत्रस्य करिष्ये मदनुग्रहम् |
Teme परमं सूक्ष्मं चिन्मात्रं सदनन्तकम्। अतो मां सुदुराराध्यं हित्वान्यान् wad जन: ।१०॥
ततस्त आशुतोषेभ्यो लब्धराज्यश्रियोद्धता:। मत्ता: प्रमत्ता वरदान् विस्मरन्त्यवजानते । ११
