Dis. 5] BOOK EIGHT 751

Weer er Pr he १३ SUSCINICIN IED Ih tet toh teetereniry: RRS He trike te wet er He 0 Ste Se EER RRR OR ton tr area

from all sin. (17—24) And to them who, waking at the close of night (the commencement of

the period known as the Brahma Muhirta, which extends over two hours and twenty-four

minutes before sunrise), extol Me by means of this hymn (mentally recited by you), O dear
one, | vouchsafe unclouded memory (of Myself) at the moment of death.(25)

SYS उवाच
इत्यादिश्य हृषीकेश: प्रध्माय जलजोत्तमम् | हर्षयन्विब्रुधानीकमारुरोह खगाधिपम् । २६॥

इतिन्धांफ्यापुंम्रप्पपास्मह्स्यासास्तिम्पक्कागच्चन्द्रमॊश्याक्ताक्तूथांऽध्याय rd

Sri Suka went on: Having spoken thus and blowing His excellent conch (Paficajanya)

and (thereby)delighting the host of gods, Sri Hari (The Controller of the senses) mounted
Garuda (the king of birds). (26)

Thus ends the fourth discourse entitled " The deliverance of the king of
elephants" in Book Eight of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

ESSERE
PII ES prey

अथ पञ्चमोऽध्याय:

Discourse ४

The gods resort to Brahma and the latter
glorifies the Lord

श्रीरुक उवाच
राजन्नुदितमेतत् ते हरे: कर्माघनाशनम्। गजेन्द्रमोक्षणं पुण्यं रैवतं त्वन्तरं श्रृणु । १ ।
पञ्चमो रैवतो नाम मनुस्तामससोदर: | बलिविन्ध्यादयस्तस्य सुता अर्जुनपूर्वका: । २ ।
विभुरिन्द्र सुरगणा राजन्भूतरयादय: | हिरण्यरोमा वेदशिरा ऊर्ध्वबाह्वादयो द्विजा: । ३ ।
पत्नी विकुण्ठा शुभ्रस्य agus: सुरसत्तमै: | तयो: स्वकलया जज्ञे वैकुण्ठो भगवान्स्वयम् । ४ ।
aque: कल्पितो येन लोको लोकनमस्कृत: । रमया प्रार्थ्यमानेन देव्या तत्म्रियकाम्यया । ५ ।
तस्यानुभाव: कथितो गुणाश्च परमोदया: | भौमान् रेणून्स विममे यो विष्णोर्वर्णयेद् गुणान् । ६ ।

Sri Suka resumed: O king! the sacred account of the aforesaid exploit of Sri Hari in the
shape of deliverance of the king of elephants, which wipes out one's sins, has (just) been
narrated to you. Now hear the story of the Manvantara presided over by Raivata.(1) The fifth
Manu, Raivata by name, was a co-uterine brother of Tamasa (the fourth Manu, son of
Priyavrata). Bali, Vindhya and others, the eldest of whom was Arjuna, were his sons.(2)Vibhu
was the Indra (the lord of paradise); while the Bh utarayas and others were the hosts of gods,
O Pariksit! (And) Hiranyaroma, Vedasira, Urdhvabahu and others* were the (seven)Brahmana
seers. (3) Vikuntha was the wife of the sage Subhra; from the union of these two appeared
in His partial being the Lord Himself under the name of Vaikuntha along with the foremost
of the gods known by the name of the Vaikunthas. (4) It was by Him as requested by (His
divine Spouse) Goddess Rama (Laksmi) and with the intention of pleasing Her that the
(divine) region of Vaikuntha, the adored of (all)the worlds, was brought into existence

* The names of the other four seers, as gathered from the Harivarnga, are:— Devabahu, Sudhama, Parjanya and
Mahamuni.
