Dis. 43 ] BOOK TEN 283

SokoKom som sO4ogit ज tot एक ए क ए tor et शाण rr ee te ter trent

amphitheatre, Sri Krsna saw stationed there the elephant Kuvalayapida as directed by its
driver. (2) Tightening the cloth round His waist (by way of preparation for an encounter) and
tying up His curly locks, Sri Krsna (a scion of Sura) challenged the keeper (as follows) in a
voice deep as the rumbling of clouds:—{3) "O driver, O driver ! allow us passage; clear out
without delay. If not, | shall presently despatch you alongwith the elephant to the abode of
Death." (4) Threatened thus, the driver full of rage goaded the elephant—which had (already)
been enraged and which looked like Yama (the chastiser of beings subject to the ravages
of Time)— towards Sri Krsna. (5) Running towards Him, the lordly elephant quickly seized
Sri Krsna with its trunk. He (however) slipped off from (the coils of) the trunk and, striking it
(with His fist), disappeared in the midst of its legs. (6) Failing to perceive Sri Krsna (the Ruler
even of Brahma and Lord Siva), the infuriated animal, which could discover things through
scent, caught hold of the Lord with the end of its trunk. He (however) forcibly escaped from
its hold. (7) Tightly seizing the mighty elephant by the tail, He (then) violently pulled it by way
of sport to a distance of twenty-five bows (or a hundred cubits) without pausing even as
Garuda (possessed of beautiful wings) would drag a cobra. (8) (Keeping hold of its tail all the
while) the immortal Lord whirled with the elephant, which was being caused to revolve
contrariwise when it turned either to the left or to the right (in order to catch hold of Sri Krsna),
even as a boy would with a calf that was (similarly) made to revolve (by him). (9) Then,
advancing in front of the elephant and striking it with His hand, the Lord in His attempt to throw
it down ran swiftly (before it) so close that He looked as though being touched by it at every
step. (10) While running, the Lord sportfully toppled down on the ground and immediately got
up (and stood aside). Taking Him to be fallen (yet) the angry elephant struck the ground with
its tusks. (11) Infuriated at its prowess having been frustrated and being urged byits keepers,
the lordly elephant ran towards Sri Krsna in rage. (12) Approaching the elephant (even) as
it came rushing, Lord Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu), caught hold of its trunk with
His hand and hurled it down to the ground. (13)Treadingon the fallen animal tike a tion (the
king of beasts), and sportfully extracting its tusks Sri Hari killed with it the elephant as well
as its keepers. (14)

मृतकं द्विषमुत्सृन्य दन्तपाणि: समाविशत्। अंसन्यस्तविषाणोऽसृङ्गदबिन्दुभिरङ्कित: ।
विरूढस्वेदकणिकावदनाम्बुरुहो TH । १५
qt oa: कतिपयैर्वलदेवजनार्दनौ i विविशतू राजन् गजदन्तवरायुधौ ।१६॥
मत्क,नपठ्!नैर्नृण्॰ Wat: स्रीणां स्मरो afar
शंजपतेर्विराडविदषां = a चोगिनां
वृष्णीनां परदेवतेति विदितो Se गत: साग्रज: 1291
हतं कुबलयापीडं a mate दुर्जयौ । केसो मनस्व्यपि तदा भृशमुद्बिविजे नृप । १८॥
am नटावुत्तमवेषधारिणौ wa: क्षिपन्तौ प्रभया निरीक्षताम् ।१९॥
निरीक्ष्य तावुत्तमपूरुषौ जना मञ्जस्थिता ape FTI
प्रहर्षवेगोत्कलितेक्षणानना: पपुर्न तृप्ता नयनैस्तदाननम् 1201
fran ga ast लिहन्तं ga जिह्वया । जिघ्रन्त इव नासाभ्यां र्लिष्यन्त ga बाहुभि: 1221
wy: परस्परं ते वै ames चथाश्रुतम्।तद्रूपगुणमाधुर्यप्रागल्भ्यस्मारिता FA । २२॥
TH भगवत: साक्षाद्धेरेर्नारायणस्य हि । अवतीर्णाविहांशेन वसुदेवस्य वेह्मनि ।२३॥
