578 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14

व AREER KETO NAN ER माय PL शाक PERS पा एक शादा TRENTO KHAN TE न मा न न

स्रीणां स्रीसङ्घिनां ag त्यक्त्वा दूरत आत्मवान्। aa विविक्त र्व्यर्व्य:।२९।
न तथास्य भवेत् ah बन्धश्चान्यप्रसङ्गत: | योषित्सङ्गाद् यथा पुंसो यथा तत्सङ्घिसङ्गत: 1301

The mind of a man dwelling on the objects of sense gets attached to them. (Even so) the
mind of one (engaged in) contemplating on Me gets absorbed in Me alone. (27) (Therefore),
giving up the thought of the unreal and worthless objects (of the world) as things seen ina
dream orfancied, concentrate your mind-purified through devotion to Me—on Me {alone).(28)
Abandoning from a distance the company of women as well as of men delighting in the
company of women, and having conquered one's mind, one should sit down in a secure and
lonely place and unweariedly think of Me. (29) In the case of such a man no such affliction
and no such bondage results from attachment to others as does from the company of women
as well as of men delighting in the company of women. (30)

उद्धव उवाच
यथा त्वामरविन्दाक्ष यादृशं वा यदात्मकम् । ध्यायेन्मुमुक्षुरेतन्मे ध्यानं त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि । ३१।
Uddhava submitted : (Now) be pleased to tell Me, 0 Lord with lotus-like eyes, the
process of meditation indicated in the foregoing verses—as to how, in what form and as what
a seeker of Liberation should contemplate on You. (31)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
सम आसन आसीन: समकायो यथासुखम् । हस्ताव्रुत्सङ्ग आधाय स्वनासाग्रकृतेक्षण: 1221
प्राणस्य ea पूरकुम्भकरेचकै: | विपर्ययेणापि शनैरभ्यसेन्निर्जितेन्दिय: 1331
हृद्यविच्छिन्नमोङ्कारं mend विसोर्णवत्। प्राणेनोदीर्य तत्राथ पुन: संवेशयेत् स्वरम् । ३४॥
एवं प्रणवसंयुक्तं प्राणमेव समभ्यसेत्। दशकृत्वस्त्रवणं मासादर्वाग् जितानिल: ।३५॥
हृत्पुण्डरीकमन्त:स्थमूर्ध्वनालमधोमुखम् । ध्यात्वोर्ध्वमुखमुन्निद्रमष्टपत्रं सकर्णिकम् ।३६॥
कर्णिकायां न्यसेत् सूर्यसोमाग्नीनुत्तरोत्तरम्। वह्निमध्ये स्मरेद् रूपं ममैतद् ध्यानमङ्गलम् ।३७॥
समं प्रशान्तं सुमुखं दीर्घचारुचतुर्भुजम्। सुचारुसुन्दरप्रीवं सुकपोलं झयुचिस्मितम् । ३८
समानकर्णमविन्यस्तस्फुरन्मकरकुण्डलम् । हेमाम्बरं waza श्रीवत्सश्रीनिकेतनम् ।३९।
शङ्खचक्रगदापद्मवनमालाविभूषितम् lifted कौस्तुभप्रभया युतम् ।४०॥
द्युमत्किरीटकटककटिसूत्राङ्गदायुतम् । सर्वाङ्सुन्दरं हृद्यं प्रसादसुमुखेक्षणम्।
सुकुमारमभिध्यायेत् सर्वाङ्गेषु मनो दधत् । ४१1
The glorious Lord replied : Seated ona seat of moderate height (neither very high nor
very low) with his body erect in a comfortable posture placing both his hands (with palm
upwards) on his lap and steadying his gaze on the tip of his nose, and having fully controlled
his senses, one should cleanse the passages of the life-breath by (the three processes of
breath-control (viz., Paraka (slow inhalation) Kumbhaka (retention of breath) and Recaka
(slow exhalation) and should slowly practise this course in the reverse order {i. e., by doing
Recaka first, Kumbhaka next and Puraka last of all) too. (32-33) Manifesting in mind through
the instrumentality of the life-breath the sound of Pranava (the sacred syllable OM), as
extending uninterruptedly, fine as a fibre of the lotus stalk, (from the Mdladhara located near
the anus up to the crown of the head) one should then follow it with a sharp nasal sound
continuous as the ringing of a bell. (34) In this way he should exercise his breath, joining it

with Pranava, thrice a day ten times each: within a month he will have attained control over
his breath.(35) Visualizing the heart—existing within the body in the shape of a lotus bud
