३2 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 8

eee CER CECE RE LEE EEK ETHER MERE वज वज ETE CEE EOE SESE SES २२२२ २२२ २२२२ HEHE RENEE AH २२२ न

न साधुवादो मुनिकोपभर्जिता नृपेन्द्रपुत्रा इति सत्त्वधामनि ।
awa तमो रोषमयं famed जगत्पवित्रात्मनि खे रजो भुव: 1१३॥
यस्येरिता सांख्यमवी ae नोर्यया मुमुक्षुस्तरते दुरत्ययम्।
भवार्णवं मृत्युपथं facia: परात्मभूतस्य कथं yagi: 1१४॥

Sagara turned out to be a universal monarch, and by his sons was dug out the ocean
(which was thenceforward named after them as Sagara). (5) In deference to the advice
of his preceptor (the sage Aurva) he did not kill (even though he conquered) the
Talajanghas, Yavanas (lonians), Sakas (Scythians), Haihayas and Barbaras (Barbarians),
but only caused them to be disfigured. Some he had thoroughly shaved, while others he
left with beards and moustaches (alone); some he left with dishevelled hair (alone, causing
their moustaches and beards to be removed), while others he left with their heads half-
shaven. (6) Some he caused to be stripped of their under-garment, while he had others
shorn of their outer garment. In the manner pointed out by the sage Aurva he (then)
propitiated by means of (anumber of) ASwamedha sacrifices Lord Sri Hari, his (very) Self,
manifested in the form of all the Vedas and the divinities. Indra (the destroyer of his
enemies’ towns) stole away his consecrated horse released as a prelude to the
sacrifice.(7-8) Looking for the horse in obedience to their father's command, the proud
sons of Sumati (one of the two wives of Sagara), numbering sixty thousand, excavated the
earth down to the sea-level on all sides. (While carrying on their excavation) in a north-
easterly direction they perceived the horse by the side of the (divine) sage Kapila. "Here
is the thief, who stole the horse, sitting with his eyes closed. Let this wicked fellow be killed
and killed (at once)!" Shouting thus, they (all) rushed (towards Him) with uplifted weapons.
At that moment the sage opened His eyes. (9--11) Deprived of their (good) sense by the
powerful Indra and already killed by (the sin of) their having offended against an exalted
soul (like the divine Kapila), they were instantly reduced to ashes by the fire of their own
body. (12) Itis not correct to say that the sons of Sagara (the king of kings) were burnt by
the wrath of the sage (Kapila). How can Tamoguna (ignorance) in the form of anger be
conceived in Him who is an embodiment of pure Sattva (Sattva unmixed with Rajas and
Tamas), and whose (divine) person is capable of purifying the (whole) universe, any more
than (prticles of) dust belonging to the earth can be conceived as attaching to the sky
(which is absolutely unattached)? (13) How could there be a sense of difference (as
between a friend and a foe) in the omniscient Lord Kapila, who is the same as the supreme
Spirit, and by whom has been launched in (the ocean of) this world the strong vessel in
the form of Sankhya (philosophy), with the help of which a seeker after Liberation is able
to cross the ocean—so difficult to cross-of worldly existence, the pathway to death? (14)

योऽसमञ्जस इत्युक्त: स केशिन्या नृपात्मज: । तस्य Gaisqam, नाम पितामहहिते रत: ।१५॥
असमञ्जस आत्मानं दर्शयन्नसमञ्जसम्। जातिस्मर: पुरा सङ्गाद्योगी योगाद्विचालित: 1281
आचरन् गर्हितं लोके ज्ञातीनां ad विप्रियम्। acai क्रीडतो बालान् प्रास्यदुद्वेजयञ्जनम् ee!
wage: परित्यक्त पित्रा स्नेहमपोह्य वै। योगैश्चर्येण बालांस्तान् eaten ततो ययौ 1१८1
अयोध्यावासिन: सर्वे बालकान् पुनरागतान्। ee विसिस्मिरे राजन् राजा चाप्यन्वतप्यत 1१९1
अंशुमांश्चोदितो राज्ञा तुरङ्गान्वेषणे ययौ । पितृव्यखातानुपथं भस्मान्ति qq हयम् ।२०॥
तत्रासीनं मुनिं वीक्ष्य कपिलाख्यमधोक्षजम्। अस्तौत् समाहितमना: प्राञ्जलि: प्रणतो महान् । २१1

He who is referred to (by the ignorant) under the name of Asamaiijasa (i.e., not good,

although—really speaking—he was exceedingly good) was another son of Emperor Sagara,

