Dis. 7 ] BOOK FOUR 315

`.८.७.७.७.७.७.३.३...७.३.६.३.३.३.७.३.३.३.७ ३३३७ ३३९ भेभेभेर्व्यष्पैध्रेळीर्व्यगैध्रेप्रंर्किषींक्लीमैर्धक्थि…
अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:
Discourse VII

Completion of Daksa's Sacrifice
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्यजेनानुनीतेन भवेन परितुष्यता । अभ्यधायि महाबाहो प्रहस्य श्रूयतामिति । १ ।

Maitreya resumed : Thus supplicated by Brahma (the unborn), Lord Siva (the father of
the universe) felt much pleased, and with a hearty laugh said, O Vidura (possessed of mighty

arms), "Listen !" (1)
श्रीमहादेव उवाच
नाघं प्रजेश बालानां वर्णये नानुचिन्तये । देवमायाभिभूतानां दण्डस्तत्र qt मया । २ ।
प्रजापतेर्दग्धशीरष्णो भवत्वजमुखं Rr: । fra चक्षुषेक्षेत भागं स्वं बर्हिषो भग: । ३ ।
पूषा तु यजमानस्य दद्भिर्जक्षतु पिष्टभुक । देवा: प्रकृतसर्वाङ्गा ये म उच्छेषणं ददु: । ४ |
बाहुभ्यामश्चिनो: YN हस्ताभ्यां कृतबाहव: । भवन्त्वध्वर्यवश्चान्ये अस्तरुमश्नुर्भृगुर्भवेत्। ५ |
Sri Mahadeva said : | never complain of nor do | recollect the misdemeanour of fools
dominated by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency), O lord of created beings. | have meted
out punishment to them (justin order to teach them a lesson). (2) Let Daksa (a lord of created
beings), whose head has been burnt, have the head of a goat above the neck. And let the
god Bhaga look on his share in the sacrificial offerings through the eyes of Mitra (another god
included in the list of the twelve Adityas presiding over the sun). (3) Let the god Pisa, who
eats flour alone, chew the same with the teeth of the sacrificer and let the (other) gods have
all their limbs restored to a sound condition now that they have assigned to Me the remains
of a sacrifice. (4) Let theAdhwaryus* and the other priests ( who have lost their arms) use
the arms of the ASwins (the twin gods who are reputed to be the physicians of heaven); while

such of them as have lost their hands may use the hands of Pisa; and let the sage Bhrgu
have the beard and moustaches of a goat. (5)

मैत्रेय उवाच

तदा सर्वाणि भूतानि श्रुत्वा मीढुष्टमोदितम्। परितुष्टात्मभिस्तात साधु साध्वित्यथान्रुवन् । ६ ।

ततो मीढ्वांसमामन्त्रय शुनासीरा: सहर्षिभि: | भूयस्तददेवयजनं समीढ्वद्देधसो ययु: । ७ ।
विधाय edt च तद्यदाह भगवान् Wa: | संदधु: कस्य कायेन सवनीयपञो: शिर: । ८ |
संधीयमाने शिरसि दक्षो रुद्राभिवीक्षित: । सद्य: सुप्त इवोत्तस्थौ ददृशे चाग्रतो मृडम् । ९ |

तदा वृषध्वजद्वेषकलिलात्मा प्रजापति: | शिवावलोकादभवच्छरद्धद इवामल: ।१०॥
भवस्तवाय कृतधीर्नाशक्नोदनुरागत: | औत्कण्ट्याद्वाष्कलया सम्परेतां सुतां स्मरन् । ११।
कृच्छ्रात्सस्तभ्य च मन: प्रेमविह्वलित: सुधी: । शशंस निर्व्यलीकेन भावेनेशं प्रजापति: 1221
Maitreya continued : Hearing the words of Lord Siva (the Most Bountiful), on that
occasion, all the creatures (present there) forthwith exclaimed, "Well said ! Well said!!" with

their soul fully gratified.(6) Thereafter the gods as well as the sages invited Lord Siva (who
showers the desired blessings on His devotees, to grace the sacrifice) and, taking with them

* The function of an Adhwaryu is to measure the sacrificial ground, to build the altar, to prepare the sacrificial vessels,
to fetch wood and water, to kindle the fire and so on. Whilst engaged in these duties, he is required to repeat the texts of the
Yajurveda.
