Dis. 2 । BOOK TEN 107

ककक २३4१ #%% 8 % LEEEELEHEAEEREDRERALAELERE RNR RARER E

मनोवचोभ्यामनुमेयवर्त्मनो देव क्रियायां प्रतियन्त्यथापि हि 1३६1
Swed गृणन् संस्मरयंश्च चिन्तयन् नामानि watt च मङ्गलानि ते ।
क्रियासु यस्त्वच्चरणारविन्दयोराविष्टचेता न भवाय कल्पते 1 BUI
fen ase waa: wa भुवो भारोऽपनीतस्तव जन्मनेशितु: |
दिष्ट्याङ्कितां त्वत्पदकै: gander गां द्यां च तवानुकम्पिताम् । ३८॥
न तेऽभवस्येश भवस्य कारणं fer fete aa तर्कयामहे ।
vat निरोध: स्थितिरप्यविद्यया कृता यतस्त्वय्यभयाश्रयात्मनि । ३९1
मत्स्याश्वकच्छपनृसिंहवराहहंसराजन्यविप्रविबुधेषु कृतावतार: ।
त्वं पासि नस्रिभुवनं च यथाधुनेश भारं भुवो हर यदूत्तम वन्दनं ते ॥४०॥
दिष्ट्याम्ब ते कुक्षिगत: पर: पुमानंशेन साक्षाद् भगवान् भवाय न: ।

मा भूद् wa भोजपतेर्मुमूर्षोर्गोप्ता चदूनां भविता तवात्मज: ।४१॥

Going thither, with sages headed by Narada and gods accompanied by their attendants
(such as Gandharvas), Brahma and Siva (the Source of the universe), glorified (in the
following words) Lord Visnu (who showers all desired boons). (25) "We seek as our shelter
You of true resolve, existing in the past, present and future (i.e., before, during and after
creation), the (ultimate) Source of earth, water and fire (collectively referred to in the Vedic
literature by the term 'Sat’), as well as of air and ether (collectively known as Tyat*) and
dwelling in the aforesaid (five) elements (called by the name of ‘Satyam'), as the Reality
underlying them (all), the Prompter of truthful speech as well as of undifferentiating vision,
and consisting of truth, which is (at the same time) the highest means of attaining You. (26)
This beginningless tree of creation indeed has one ground (in the shape of Prakrti or
Primordial Matter),a couple of fruits (in the form of pleasure and pain), three roots (in the form
of the three modes of Prakrti viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), four kinds of sap (in the form
of the four objects of human pursuit, viz., religious merit, earthly possessions, sensuous
pleasure and final Beatitude), five media of perception (in the form of the five senses of
perception), six states (viz., birth, existence, growth, ripeness, decay and destruction or six
forms of anguish, viz., hunger and thirst, grief and infatuation, old age and death), seven
layers of barks (in the form of the seven constituents of a body, viz., chyle, blood, flesh, fat,
bone, marrow and semen), eight boughs (in the shape of the five elements—viz., earth,
water, fire, air and ether—mind, reason and ego) and nine hollows (in the form of the nine
apertures of the body, viz., the two sockets of eyes, the two cavities of ears, the two nostrils,
the mouth and the organs of urination and defecation) and a pair of birds (viz., the individual
soul and the Inner Controller inhabiting it) and is endowed with ten leaves (in the form of the
ten vital airs, viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana, Samana, Naga, Kirma, Krkala, Devadatta
and Dhanafijaya). (27) You alone are the Cause of the aforesaid tree in the form of the
phenomenal universe; You are its resting-place and you are its preserver (too). Those whose
wisdom is clouded by Your Maya (deluding potency) look upon You as many, (but) not so
those who are wise. (28) Being the Spirit, which is consciousness itself, You repeatedly
assume (reveal) for the welfare of the mobile and the immobile creation forms constituted
of Sativa (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), which bring delight to the righteous and are
harmful (bring destruction) to the wicked. (29) With their mind fixed through concentration
on You, the embodiment of pure Sattva, O lotus-eyed Lord, the select few (those endowed

* The Sruti text ॐ४5:--तत् सत्यमित्वाचक्षते।
