632 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

PERE AR HE NEE E BENET CHEN SOREN ENE TE EE THERON HCN NRARORORE TOS! न कक २२ न न २ च OE य न् २७६ ००८

w सांख्यविधि: sme: संजयग्रन्थिभेदन: । प्रतिलोमानुलोमाभ्यां परावरदृशा मया 1281
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामेकादशस्कन्धे चतुर्विशोऽध्याय: ।२४॥

The glorious Lord began again:| shall now fully expound before you the truth
underlying the doctrine of Sankhya as conclusively ascertained by the ancient seers (Kapila
and others), realizing which a man bids fair to shed at once the delusion (in the shape of
varied experiences such as joy and sorrow etc.), occasioned by the notion of difference (as
between oneself and others). (1) During the period of final dissolution (before the Yugas
began to run their course), in the very first Satya Yuga (at the beginning of creation) and
whenever there are men shrewd of judgment, (in their eyes too) the subjective consciousness
(in the shape of the seer) as well as the entire objective existence was one absolutely
undifferentiated substance (Brahma) indeed. (2) That absolute undifferentiated reality,
Brahma (the Infinite), which is beyond the ken of speech and the mind, became dual (as it
were) in the shape of Maya (objective existence) and that which is reflected init (viz., the Jiva
or the seer). (3) Of the said two (halves), one substance indeed is the well-known Prakriti,
consisting of two aspects (viz., cause and effect), while the other entity is consciousness
(itself), and that is called Puruga (the Spirit). (4) Out of (this) Prakrti—(even) while its
equilibrium was being disturbed by Me (in the form of the Time-Spirit) as motivated by the
Jivas (whose Karma is ultimately responsible for creation)—there appeared the three
Gunas —Tamas, Rajas and Sattva. (5) Out of the aforesaid (three Gunas) was evolved the
Sutra (the principle of cosmic activity) as well as Mahat (the principle of cosmic intelligence),
which is (ever) accompanied by the Sutra (of which it is a counterpart and in conjunction with
it forms one composite whole). From Mahat, even as it underwent modification, there
appeared Ahankara (the cosmic ego), which deluded the Jiva (by bringing about its
identification with the body etc. ). (6) (This) Ahankarais of three kinds, viz., Sattvika, Rajasika
and Tamasika. Itis the cause of the five Tanmatrdas (the subtle elements), the eleven Ind riyas
(the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and the mind {including the
deities presiding over the Indriyas and the mind) and (though material or non-spiritual in
substance ॥ 18 a sort of connecting link between Spirit and Matter inasmuch as it is
interpenetrated by a reflection of the Spirit and) is (therefore considered to be both) spiritual
and material. (7) From the Tamasika type of Ahankara, which is the source of the (five)
Tanmatras, came into being (through the Tanmatras) the (five gross) elements (ether, the
air, fire, water and earth), from the Rajasika type sprang up the (ten) Indriyas; and from the
Sattvika type were evolved the eleven deities (presiding over the Indriyas and the mind, viz.,
the deities presiding over the quarters, the wind-god, the sun-god, Varuna, the god of water,
the Aswinikumaras, the god of fire, Indra, the lord of paradise, Lord Visnu, Mitra and
Prajapati, the deity presiding over procreation, and the moon-god), as well as the mind. (8)
Impelled (energized) by Me, and rendered operative in conjunction with one another, all the
(aforementioned) categories evolved the cosmic egg. (which served as) My excellent
sporting-ground (when | entered itas its Inner Controller). (9) In that egg asit lay on the waters
(that constituted a support for the egg and are referred to in the Vaisnava literature by the
name of Garbhoda) appeared | (in the form of Garbhodasay Narayana, the second Cosmic
Person). From My navel sprang up the lotus that (brought forth the universe and as such)
bore the name of the universe; and on that lotus appeared Brahma (the self-born, another
manifestation of the Cosmic Person with four faces and invested with a body evolved as ४
result of past meritorious deeds). (10) Characterized by Rajas (the principle of activity) and
equipped with askesis, the aforesaid Brahma (the creator of the universe) evolved by My
grace the three spheres— viz., Bhurloka (the terrestrial globe including the seven subterranean
regions, viz., Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala), Bhuvarloka (the
aerial region) and Swarloka (understood in its wider sense as comprising the five celestial

