Dis. 4] - BOOK FOUR 303

ae mer am गिरेरितं yo सकृत्प्रसङ्गादघमाशु हन्ति तत्।
पवित्रकीर्तिं . तमलङ्घ्यशासनं भवानहो द्वेष्टि शिवं fara: ।१४॥
लोकस्य यद्वर्षति चाशिषोऽर्थिनस्तस्मै भवान् guia विश्वबन्धवे । १५॥

The worshipful goddess said: None other than you would antagonize Him (Lord Siva),
who is unsurpassed in this world, to whom no one is dear or hateful, who is the beloved Self
of all embodied beings, nay, who is the cause of all and is free from enmity. (11) People like
you, O Brahmana, discover faults even in the virtues of others; but there are some pious
souls who never do so. The greatest of all are they who are wont to magnify even the most
trifling virtues (of others). You, however, have found fault even with such people. (12) It is
no wonder that those ignoble souls who declare the material body—which is no better than
acorpse—as the self, always indulge in maliciously reveling exalted souls. Such a behaviour
befits those people, since their glory is obscured by the dust of feet of those exalted souls.
(Failing to reach the heights of glory attained by such exalted souls, they try to hide their
shame by vilifying these people). (13) You hate Lord Siva of sacred renown, whose
command is inviolable, nay, whose (celebrated) name of two syllables (SIVA), uttered with
the tongue even once and that too casually, immediately wipes out the sins of men (who utter
them) ! You are a coursed indeed. (14) You bear enmity to that Befriender of the universe,
whose lotus-feet are not only resorted to by the bee-like minds of exalted souls, thirsting for
honey in the shape of the joy of absorption in Brahma (the Absolute), but also shower the
blessings sought after by interested people. (15)

fa वा शिवाख्यमशिवं न विदुस्त्वदन्ये ब्रह्मादयस्तमवकीर्य जटा: इमशाने ।
तन्माल्यभस्मनृकपाल्यवसत्पिशाचैर्ये मूर्धभिर्दधति तच्चरणाबसृष्टम्।१६।
छिन्द्यात्रसह्य रुशतीमसतीं प्रभुश्चेजिह्वामसूनपि ad विसृजेत्स ad: ।१७॥
aaa meat न धारयिष्ये शितिकण्ठगर्हिण: ।
जग्धस्य मोहाद्धि विशुद्धिमन्धसो जुगुप्सितस्योद्धरणं प्रचक्षते ec
न वेदवादाननुवर्तते मति: स्व Wa लोके wel महामुने: ।
यथा गतिर्देवमनुष्ययो: पृथक स्व एव धर्मे न परं क्षिपेत्स्थित: ।१९॥
कर्म प्रवृत्तं च famed वेदे विविच्योभयलिङ्गमाश्रितम् ।
विरोधि तद्योगपदैककर्तरि द्वयं am ब्रह्मणि ad नर्च्छति । २०॥

Do not people other than you, such as Brahma (the creator) and others, who place on
their heads flowers etc., dropped from His feet, know Him to be inauspicious, though bearing
the appellation of Siva (all-auspicious)—Him who lived in the company of fiends in
crematories, throwing about His matted locks and wearing on His person the wreaths lying
there as well as the ashes (of funeral piles) and human skulls? (16) A man should shut his
ears and leave the place where his master—a defender of righteousness—is being
vituperated by unbridled men, in case he is powerless (to take the life of the reviler or to lay
down his own life); or, if he has the power, he should forcibly cut off the vile tongue that
indulges in such blasphemy, and then give up his own life as well (if need be). Such is the
course of duty. (17) Therefore, | shall no longer retain this body, begotten of you, a vilifier
of Lord Siva (the dark-necked) ! For the wise declare that one gets purified only by vomiting
the impure food consumed through ignorance. (18) The mind of a great sage reveling in his
