46 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis.'6

SEER EE ORO ROR RRR CRORE RS SAYRE RE RRR ORR RO RE RR Hy ret BY CRE BEBE AT AMR PEROT RSE MRR HOM TRE REE HAH BR eB ROH BY BT HL

श्रुत्वेति तद्वाक्यमतिप्रसन्ना: प्रेमार्द्रचित्ता हरिमूचिरि ते । ८८॥
नगाहगाथासु च सर्वभक्तैरेभिस्त्वया भाव्यमिति प्रयत्नात्।
मनोरथोऽयं परिपूरणीयस्तथेति चोक्त्वान्तरधीयताच्युत: 128 |

Ne) Siita went on: While the glorious Suka (the son of Vyasa) was speaking as aforesaid, Sri

Hari appeared in the midst of the assembly, accompanied by Prahlada, Bali, Uddhava,
Arjuna and others. Narada (the celestial sage) worshipped Him as well as the afore-
mentioned (devotees). (84) Beholding Sri Hari, who was now perched on a high seat,
cheerful, they presently commenced chanting the divine names and praises before Him.
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), accompanied by Goddess Parvati (the divine Spouse
of Lord Siva), and Brahma (who remains seated on a lotus) arrived on the scene to witness
the Kirtana. (85) Prahlada held (struck) the wooden cymbals because of his agility, while
Uddhava held the brass ones. Narada (the celestial seer) played upon his lute; Arjuna, who
was a master of tunes, kept up the vocal melody. Indra (the lord of paradise, the ruler of the
gods) sounded a wooden tomtom; the aforesaid Kumaras (Sanaka and his three brothers)
raised shouts of glory in a melodious voice (at intervals) in that chorus, where Sri Suka (the
son of Vyasa) stood foremost giving expression to (different) emotions by means of charming
(literary) compositions. (86) In the centre of that assembly danced like actors that very trio
of Bhakti and others (the other two being JAana and Vairagya), who were full of great
splendour, Sri Hari too was pleased, to witness this transcendent Kirtana, and presently
spoke as follows :— (87) “I feel (highly) gratified at this moment through the exposition (of
Srimad Bhagavata) and the Kirtana. Ask a boon of your choice of Me, who have been won
by your devotion." Greatly rejoiced to hear these words of the Lord, they submitted to Sri Hari
as follows, their heart moistened with emotion:— (88) "Our ambition is that in (all future)
sacrificial sessions consisting of a seven days’ exposition of Srimad Bhagavata, You must
be present with all these (devotees of Yours). This should be scrupulously fulfilled by You."
And saying "Be it so |" Sri Hari (the immortal Lord ) disappeared. (89)

ततोऽनमत्तच्चरणेषु नारदस्तथा शुकादीनपि तापसांश्च ।
aa see: often: सर्वे ययु: पीतकथामृतास्ते । ९०।
भक्ति: सुताभ्यां सह रक्षिता सा ae स्वकीयेऽपि तदा Yar |
अतो हरिर्भागवतस्य सेवनाच्चित्तं समायाति हि वैष्णवानाम् ।९१॥
दारिद्र्यदु:खज्वरदाहितानां भायापिशाचीपरिमर्दितानाम् |
संसारसिन्धौ परिपातितानां क्षेमाय a भागवतं प्रगर्जति । ९२
Thereupon Narada bowed in the direction of the feet of the Lord and His companions,
as wellas to Sri Suka and other ascetics. All those who had drunk of the nectar in the shape
of the exposition of Srimad Bhagavata had their delusion dispelled and, extremely delighted,
forthwith dispersed. (90) The — celebrated Bhakti alongwith her two sons (Jhana and
Vairagya) was then installed by Sri Suka in Srimad Bhagavata (the scripture associated with
his name) as well. Hence as a result ofthe Vaisnavas resorting to Srimad Bhagavata Sri Hari
actually occupies their heart. (91) Srimad Bhagavata, they say, loudly proclaims its efficacy
to deliver those tormented by the fever of agony caused by poverty, those trampled upon by
the deviless of Maya and those hurled into the ocean of transmigration. (92)
