Dis. 19 J BOOK EIGHT — 815

RERHCHHAA ASL AKRAHEREHERERELTEAEKCCESEECAALERAERHERAN AMARA KNEE ENR ROE eee
EEE ERT

this much alone; (for) wealth is desirable only to the extent of one's (bare) need. (27)
SYP उवाच
yaw: स हसन्नाह वाञ्छात: प्रतिगृह्यताम्। वामनाय महीं दातुं जग्राह जलभाजनम् । २८॥

॥ विष्णवे क्ष्मां प्रदास्यन्तमुशाना असुरेश्वरम्। जानंश्चिकीर्षितं विष्णो: शिष्यं ore विदां az: । २९॥

Sri Suka continued : Thus spoken to, he (Bali) laughingly said, "Take as much as you
will." He (then) took up a pot of water* in order to (make a solemn vow to) give (three paces
of) land to the divine Dwarf. (28) (The sage) USana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of the
demons), the foremost ofthe learned, who knew the object of Lord Visnu, warned his disciple,
Bali (the ruler of the Asuras)—who was bent on gifting land to the same Lord—(in the
following words). (29) _ शुक्र उवाच

एष ate साक्षाद् भगवान्विष्णुरव्यय: | करुयपाददितेर्जातो देवानां कार्यसाधक: 1301
प्रतिश्रुतं त्वयैतस्मै यदनर्थमजानता । न साधु मन्ये दैत्यानां महानुपगतोऽनय: 1321
एष ते wae श्रियं तेजो ae: श्रुतम् । दास्यत्याच्छिद्य शक्राय मायामाणवको af: 1321
त्रिभि: क्रमैरिमाँल्लोकान्विश्वकाय: क्रमिष्यति । ade विष्णवे दत्त्वा qe वर्तिष्यसे कथम् । ३३॥
क्रमतो गां पदैकेन द्वितीयेन fed विभो: । खं च कायेन महता-`तार्तीयस्य कुतो fe: ।३४॥
निष्ठां ते नरके मन्ये ह्यप्रदातु: प्रतिश्रुतम् । प्रतिश्रुतस्य asta: प्रतिपादयितुं भवान् । ३५॥
न wet प्रशंसन्ति येन वृत्तिर्विपद्यते। दानं यज्ञस्तप: कर्म oth वृत्तिमतो aa: 1३६॥
धर्माय यशसेऽर्थाय कामाय स्वजनाय च । पञ्चधा विभजन्वित्तमिहामुत्र च मोदते । ३७॥
अत्रापि बह्वुचैर्गीतं श्रृणु मेऽसुरसत्तम । सत्यमोमिति यत् प्रोक्तं यन्नेत्याहानृतं fe तत् । ३८।
wa पुष्पफलं «fame गीयते। वृक्षेऽजजीवति तन्न स्यादनृतं मूलमात्मन: 13¢1
तद् यथा qa उन्मूल: शुष्यत्युद्दर्ततेऽचिरात्। एवं नष्टानृत: सद्य आत्मा Yaa Aa: ।४०॥
पराग् रिक्तमपूर्णं वा start यत् तदोमिति | यत् किञ्चिदोमिति ब्रूयात् तेन रिच्येत वै पुमान् ।
थिक्षवे_सवपोट्टुर्वन्नालकांपनचात्मने ।४१॥
अथैतत् पूर्णमभ्यात्मं यच्च Ae वच: । सर्वं नेत्यनृतं ब्रूयात् स दुष्कीर्ति: श्वसन्मृत: ।४२।
way नर्मविवाहे च वृत्त्यर्थे प्राणसंकटे। गोब्राह्मणार्थे हिंसायां amd स्याजुगुप्सितम् ।४३॥
॥ इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामष्टमस्कन्धे वामनप्रादुर्भावे एकोनविंश्चोऽध्याय: 128 |
Sukra said: Sprung from the loins of the sage KaSyapa through Aditi, 0 son of Virocana,
this dwarf is no other than the immortal Lord Visnu, who is bent upon accomplishing the
purpose of the gods. (30) | do not approve of what you have promised to Him, ignorant as
you are of the harm that will follow (from it). A great calamity has surely befallen the
Asuras.(31) Appearing as a Brahmacari (religious student) through (His) Maya (deluding

potency), this Hari will snatch your throne, dominion, fortune, splendour and glory (so) widely
known, and bestow it on (His own brother) Sakra (Indra).(32) Assuming a form co-extensive

* It is customary among the Hindus to make a solemn vow or declaration of purpose before actually undertaking any
religious act of austerity, sacrifice or gift. The way to doa itis to take some water with flowers in the hollow of one's right palm,
to mention the time and place of the undertaking and the personal as well as the family name of the person undertaking it, as
well as of the Brahmana on whom a giftis proposed to be bestowed or whose services as an officiating -priest are going to be
engaged for the occasion, and then to declare the purpose itself. This being done, the water in the hollow of one's palm is
discharged on the ground, thus solemnizing the vow.
