Dis. 72] BOOK TEN 425

RIDA RII Ee EM LAE TERESA EM

by men of virtue, he deserves to be pitied and censured. (20) Kings Hariscandra and
Rantideva, Sibi, and Bali, the sage Mudgala (who lived on grains gleaned from the fields),
the famous pigeon of the legend (who gave up his life for the sake of a fowler) and the fowler
(who sacrificed his life in imitation of the pigeon’s self-sacrificing act), and many more
attained lasting happiness through the transient body and its belongings.” (21)
स्वरेराकृतिभिस्तांस्तु waited । राजन्यबन्धून् विज्ञाय दृष्टपूर्वानचिन्तयत् ।२२॥
राजन्यबन्धवो ह्येते ब्रह्मलिङ्गानि बिभ्रति । ददामि भिक्षितं asa आत्मानमपि दुस्त्यजम् 1231
aed श्रूयते कीर्तिर्वितता दिक्ष्वकल्मषा । ऐश्वर्याद् भ्रंशितस्यापि विप्रव्याजेन विष्णुना ।२४॥
Ba जिहीर्षतेन्द्रस्य विष्णवे द्विजरूपिणे । जानन्नपि महीं were वार्यमाणोऽपि देत्यराट् । २५1
Siem ब्राह्मणार्थाय को wae: क्षत्रबन्धुना । देहेन पतमानेन नेहता fags aa ।२६॥
seer: प्राहं कृष्णार्जुनवृकोदरान्। हे विप्रा व्रियतां कामो ददाम्यात्पशिरोऽपि व: । २७।

Sri Suka went on : Pariksit, from their tone, appearance and forearms bearing scars
caused by the friction of bow-strings, Jarasandha came to know that the newcomers were
no Brahmanas, but Ksatriyas come in the guise of Brahmanas. He had a hazy notion that
he had seen them somewhere before. (22) But he reflected, "Though Ksatriyas, they have
taken this guise of Brahmanas (out of fear for Me). When they have gone to the length of
seeking a gift from me, | shall give them even this body though difficult to part with. (23) God
Visnu, appearing in the guise of a Brahmana, deprived Bali of his lordly position; and yet the
unsullied fame of Bali is sung extensively in all directions. (24) itis true, Visnu had assumed
that diminutive form of a Brahmana in order to return the ruling authority to its rightful owner
Indra. Bali had come to know it and was opposed by Sukra, his preceptor; and yet he gave
away the earth. (25) This body is sure to perish one day. A Ksatriya who does not endeavour
to attain extensive fame through it, and does not live for the sake of the Brahmanas alone,
lives in vain." (26) (Pariksit), Jarasandha was a liberal-minded king. Reflecting thus, he said
to Sti Krsna, Arjuna and Bhimasena, disguised as Brahmanas, as follows:—"Brahmanas,
seek whatever you desire; | am prepared to give you everything, even my head.” (27)

श्रभगवानुवाच

ae नो देहि wre weet यदि मन्यसे । युद्धार्थिनो वयं प्राप्ता राजन्या नान्नकाङ्खगिण: । २८॥
असौ Gare: पार्थस्तस्य भ्रातार्जुनो ह्ययम्। अनयोर्मातुलेयं at कृष्णं जानीहि ते रिपुम् 1२९॥
एवमावेदितो राजा जहासोच्चै: स्म मागध:। आह चामर्षितो मन्दा युद्धं तर्हि ददामि व: 1201
न त्वया भीरुणा योत्स्ये gfe विक्कवचेतसा । मथुरां स्वपुरीं त्यक्त्वा समुद्रं UO गत: 1321
अयं तु व्रयसा तुल्यो नातिसत्त्वो न मे सम: । अर्जुनो न भवेद् योद्धा भीमस्तुल्यबलो मम 1321
इत्युक्त्वा भीमसेनाय sem महतीं vem feist स्वयमादाय निर्जगाम पुराद् बहि: 1331
तत: समे we बीरौ संयुक्तावितरेतरौ । जघ्नतुर्वज्रकल्पाभ्यां naa रणदुर्मदौ ।३४॥
मण्डलानि विचित्राणि wet दक्षिणमेव्र च। चरतो: शुशुभे qe नटयोरिव रङ्गिणो: ।३५॥
ततश्चटचटाशब्दो वज्रनिष्पेषसन्निभ: । गदयो: क्षिप्तयो राजन् दन्तयोरिव दन्तिनो: 1241

ते वै गदे भुजजवेन निपात्यमाने अन्योन्यतोऽसकटिपादकरोरुजत्रून् ।

चूर्णीबभूवतुरुपेत्य यथार्कशाखे संयुध्यतोरद्बविरदयोरिव दीप्तमन्य्वो: 1301
