506 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 89

LEAN OEM NOCHE NTH H ATONE NS eee शा HUST ENereKenninetoKeernenene न् न न न न ८

subjects) are no better than Brahmanas assembled for a sacrifice. (27-28) The rulers in
whose kingdom a Brahmana grieves over the loss of his wealth, wife or children are (no
Ksatriyas, but) mere actors playing the role of a Ksatriya only to fill their belly. (They live in
vain.) (29) O Brahmana, | undertake to protect the child that may be born to you (hereafter),
afflicted as you and your wife are (by the loss of your children) here. If । fail to carry out my
promise, | shail jump into fire (and put an end to my life) and (thereby) atone for my sin,” (30)

त्राह्मण उवाच
सङ्कर्षणो वासुदेव: प्रद्युम्नो धन्विनां वर: । अनिरुद्धोऽप्रतिरथो न a झक्नुवन्ति यत् ।३१॥
तत् कर्थं नु भवान् कर्म दुष्करं `जगदीश्वरै: । चिकीर्षसि त्वं बालिदयात् aa sree वयम् 1321

The Brahmana said : (Arjuna!) when Sri Balarama, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, Pradyumna,
the foremost of archers, and the matchless warrior Aniruddha have failed to protect my
children, how dare you undertake to do so ? Even those fords of the world find it an
impossible task. It is simply childish on your part to brag like this. We cannot put any faith
In your words, (31-32)

अर्जुन उवाच

नाहं सङ्कुर्षणो ब्रह्मम् न कृष्ण: काष्णिरेव च । अहं वा अर्जुनो नाम गाण्डीवं यस्य वै धनु: 1331
मावर्मस्था मम ब्रह्मन् वीर्य त्र्यम्बकतोषणम् yal विजित्य प्रधने आनेष्ये ते प्रजां प्रभो ।३४॥
Arjuna replied ; | am neither Balarama, nor Sri Krsna, nor again Pradyumna. Surely |
am Arjuna, the wielder of the famous Gandiva bow, 0 worshipful one! (33) Please do not
make light of my prowess, with which | pleased the three-eyed Sankara (Himself). । shall
conquer even the god of death in battle and bring back your child, my master. (34)
एवं विश्रम्भितो fas: फाल्गुनेन परंतप । जगाम स्वगृहं प्रीत: पार्थवीर्य निशामयन् । ३५॥
प्रसूतिकाल aaa भार्याया द्विजसत्तम: । पाहि पाहि प्रजां मृत्योरित्याहार्जुनमातुर: । ३६1
a उपस्पृश्य Teast नमस्कृत्य ween दिव्यान्यस्त्राणि संस्मृत्य सज्यं गाण्डीवमाददे । ३७॥
न्यरुणत् सूतिकागारं इनैर्नानास्त्रयोजिते: । तिर्यगूर्ध्वमध: पार्थश्चकार ङारपञ्जरम् ।३८॥
तत: HAR: संजातो विप्रपत्न्या रुदन् मुहु: । सद्योऽदर्शनमापेदे सरीरो विहायसा ।३९॥
तदाऽऽह विप्रो fad विनिन्दन् कृष्णसन्निधौ i मौढ्यं wera मे योऽहं sed क्लीबकत्थनम् ।४०॥
न प्रद्युम्नो नानिरुद्धो न रामो न च केशव:। यस्य dep. ofr कोऽन्यस्तदवितेश्वर: vel
धिगर्जुने मृषावादं धिगात्मह्लाघिनो धनु: । दैवोपसृष्टं यो मौढ्यादानिनीषति alfa: ।४२॥
Pariksit, thus (comforted and) assured by Arjuna, the Brahmana returned tohis place full
of delight and eager to witness Arjuna’s prowess. (35) As the period of confinement of his wife
drew near, the exalted Brahmana approached Arjuna in great anxiety and entreated him
saying, "Pray, protect my child from death.” (36) (Hearing this), Arjuna sipped a little pure
water and bowed to Bhagavan Sankara. Thereafter he invoked all his weapons of super-
natural efficacy and took up his Gandiva bow having strung it properly. (37) He fenced on
all sides, as well as above and below, the house of confinement with arrows charmed with
the power of Mantras, thus encasing it in a cage of arrows as it were. (38) The wife of the
Brahmana in due course gave birth to a child, which gave repeated cries; but presently it
bodily disappeared through the sky. (39) Now the Brahmana began to censure Arjuna in the
presence of Sri Krsna. He said, “ Look at my folly | put my faith in the futile boast of a
eunuch.(40) Who else is powerful enough to save one whom neither Pradyumna nor
Aniruddha, nor even Balarama and Sri Krsna could protect ? (41) Fie upon Arjuna, who made
