Dis. 13] BOOK THREE 193
PEPELETL LESSEE A ARORA ALE AREER AREER Hh RI ih hh eh toe th Sh Sane teiniiniin tinting
NO EIR ERR ER Se eT ३

drinking the Soma, generally of a square shape, made of wood and furnished with a handle)
abide in the cavity of Your ears; the Prasitra (a vessel in which the Brahma's share is poured)
exists in Your mouth and the Grahas (ladles or vessels employed for taking up a portion of
some fluid, especially of Soma, out of alarger vessel) in Your throat. And Your act of chewing,
O Lord; constitutes the Agnihotra (pouring oblations into the sacred fire). (36) Your repeated
descent (into the world of matter) is what is known as the Diksaniya Isti (the offering of
oblations into the sacred fire at the time of consecration fora sacrifice); the three Istis known
by the name of Upasads (which precede the Sutya or pressing of the Soma in a Jyotistoma
sacrifice) constitute Your neck; the Prayaniya |sti (that which follows the Diksa orconsecration)
and the Udayaniya Isti (that which is performed at the end ofa sacrifice) are Your tusks; the
Pravargya (the ceremony called Mahavira performed at the beginning of every Upasad)
forms Your tongue; the Sabhya and the Avasathya fires form Your head and the putting of
bricks in layers or rows for the preparation of a sacrificial altar constitutes Your vital airs,
revealed as You are in the form of a sacrifice. (37) Your generative fluid is the Soma and Your
sitting posture constitutes the sacrificial rites performed thrice (in the morning, at midday and
in the evening) everyday. The seven constituents of Your body are the seven classes of main
sacrifices (viz., Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, Uktha, Sodasgi, Vajapeya, Atiratraand Aptoryama);
while the joints of Your body constitute all the Satras (series of sacrifices continued for a
number of days). In this way You combine in Your person all the Yajfias (sacrifices in which
the Soma is not used) and Kratus (those in which the Soma is used), the tendons of Your
body forming the various sacrifices. (38) Hail, hail to You, who represent in Your person all
the Mantras (sacred formulas) employed, the deities worshipped and the materials used (by
way of oblations etc.) ina sacrifice, as wellas all sacrificial acts and other activities. Nay, You
also embody the wisdom gained through dispassion, Devotion and self-control, and are our
teacher imparting all sorts of knowledge. Hail, hail to You. (39) Borne by You on the pointed
ends of Your tusks, O Lord, the earth with its mountains, O Supporter of the globe; shines
resplendent like a lotus plant with leaves supported on the tusks of a lordly elephant
emerging from water. (40) Again, with the terrestrial globe supported on the tusks, this boar-
like form of Yours, which consists of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda)
looks as charming as the beauty of a huge mountain with a mass of clouds hanging on its.
summit. (41) (Kindly) place this mother of the entire animate and inanimate creation, who
is Your spouse, firmly (on water) in order to make herhabitable forall: for Youare their Father.
Then we shall make obeisance to You as well as to her, in whom You have deposited Your
seed (in the form of sustaining power) even as the sacrificer invokes the sacrificial fire in the
Arani (the piece of wood used for kindling of.fire by attrition with the chanting of sacred
formulas). (42) Who else than You, O Lord, could venture to lift up the earth, that had sunk
into the lowest depths of water? This is, however, nothing miraculous for You, the abode of
all wonders, who have created this most marvellous universe by Your Maya (wonderful
creative energy). (43) When You shook Your body composed of the Vedas, we, the
inhabitants of the Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, gotsplashed and thoroughly depurated
by the drops of holy water flying from the end of Your mane. (44) Alas! he has verily lost his
wits, who seeks to know Your endless exploits in their totality. O Lord, bring happiness to
the whole universe, which stands deluded through contact with the objects of senses,
brought about by Your Yogamaya. (45)

मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्युपस्थीयमानस्तैर्मुनिभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: । सलिले स्वखुराक्रान्तं उपाधत्तावितावनिम् ।४६॥
a ya भगवानुर्वीं विघ्वक्सेन: प्रजापति: | रसाया लीलयोन्नीतामप्सु wer ययौ हरि: ix
