520 । SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

SHOCK दा होजा ना क दा जा वा चीतथिद्छवौ दा कौ का owt HH Oe iow शा ee eee ee 8 oe 8 oe Oe ee a ता

Varsas—bearing the title of Purusa, Rsabha, Dravina and Devaka—wait upon the Deity in
the form of water* with the hollow of their joined palms full of water. (22) (They repeat the
following prayer:—) "O (god presiding over) water ! You are endowed with the energy of God
(the Supreme Person). (Therefore) consecrating the three worlds (heaven and earth and the
space intervening them), (and) capable of wiping out sins by your very nature, (pray,) purify
our bodies as we touch you.” (23)

परीतो यस्मिन् शाको नाम महीरुह: स्वक्षेत्रव्यपदेशको यस्य ह महासुरभिगन्धस्तं द्वीपमनुवासयति | २४॥

`तस्यापि teaa एवाधिपतिर्नाम्ना मेधातिथि: सोऽपि विभज्य सप्त वर्षाणि पुत्रनामानि तेषु स्वात्मजान्

७ व OS

WANE: शतकेसर: सगत्रस्नातादवपालोग्मग्म्यानसइतिअनघाऽऽनुंदाउभयस्मृष्टिंस्पसानतापञ्चपदा

सहस्नस्रुतिर्निजधृतिरिति। २६ तद्वर्षपुरुषा ऋतव्रतसत्यव्रतदानव्रतानुव्रतनामानो भगवन्तं वाय्वात्मकं

प्राणायामविधूतरजस्तमस: परमसमाधिना चजन्ते । 29 |

अन्त:प्रविश्य भूतानि यो बिभर्तयात्मकेतुभि: ।अन्तर्यामीश्वर: साक्षात्पातु नो वद्वशे स्फुटम्। २८ |
Likewise, situated beyond the ocean of milk and round about it is the Sakadwipa with

a width of thirty-two lakh Yojanas (or 2,56,00,000 miles) and enclosed by an equally wide
ocean of liquid curds. In that Dwipa stands a tree bearing the appellation of Saka, which is
responsible for the name of the Dwipa and whose most fragrant odour they say perfumes
the (entire) Dwipa. (24) The (first) ruler of that Dwipa too was a (the sixth) son of Priyavrata,
Medhatithi by name. He too carved out seven Varsas, that were named after his sons, and,
having installed there as (their) rulers his own sons—bearing the names of Purojava,
Manojava, Pavamana, Dhtmranika, Citrarepha, Bahurtpa and Viswadhara—himself
entered (retired to) a forest suitable for religious austerities, his mind given to Lord
Ananta.(25) The mountains forming the boundaries of these Varsas, as well as the rivers of
these Varsas are severally seven only—viz., the Igana, Urusrnga, Balabhadra, Satakesara
Sahasrasrota, Devapala and Mahanasa (mountains) and the Anagha, Ayurda, Ubhayasprsti,
Aparajita, Paficapadi, Sahasrasruti and Nijadhrti (rivers). (26) (The four classes of) the
people of those Varsas—severally bearing the title of Rtavrata, Satyavrata, Danavrata and
Anuvrata—worship the Lord in the form of the wind-god through supreme concentration of
mind, having shaken off (the elements of) Rajas and Tamas by means of Pranayama
(breath-control). (27) (They repeat the following prayer:—)"May that Lord, the very inner
Controller (of all) under whose sway this visible universe exists and who, having entered (the
body of all) animate beings (as air), sustains them by His (fivefold) functions of inhalation,
exhalation and so on (that serve as a token of His own existence)—protect us!" (28)

wer २९ ।तण्डौपमध्यमानसात्तरनापकएबाव्राचानपराचानवपवाग्मयप्ताचत्वाऽयतयाननाच्छ्रप्त्यग्र्यम्पा
यत्रतुचतसृषु दिक्षु चत्वारि पुराणिलोकपालानामिन्द्रादीनां यदुपरिष्टात्सूर्यरथस्य मेरुं परिभ्रमत: संवत्सरात्मकं,
wa देवानामहोरात्राभ्यां परिभ्रमति। ३०॥ तदद्वीपस्याप्यधिपति: प्रैयव्रतो वीतिहोत्रो नामैतस्यात्मजौ
रमणकथधातकिनामानौ वर्षपती नियुज्य स स्वयं पूर्वजवद्भगवत्कर्मशील एवास्ते | ३१ । तद्वर्षपुरुषा भगवन्तं
ब्रह्मस्तपिणं सकर्मकेण कर्मणाऽऽराधयन्तीदं चोदाहरन्ति। B21
* The worship of God In the form of water (as in any other form, since all forms, are His) has been recommended in
Ihe Vedic text— जलं ब्रह्मोपासात and is thus quite in keeping with the spirit of scriptures.

