454 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 80

HOKAAHERSEHSEKENTAA ANAL OT HE CATA E TATE SOS 9 99 292 EE EA 99 ARON TAS # 98 # 229 AAR NONE मा Re

wey: प्रियस्य विप्रर्षेरङ्गसङ्गातिनिर्वृत: । प्रीतो व्यमुञ्जदब्बिन्दून् नेत्राभ्यां पुष्करेक्षण: । १९।
अथोपवेश्य पर्यङ्के स्वयं सख्यु: समर्हणम्। उपहृत्यावनिज्यास्य पादौ पादावनेजनी: 1201
अग्रहीच्छिरसा राजन् भगवाँल्लोकपावन: । व्यलिम्पदु दिव्यगन्धेन चन्दनागुरुकुङ्कुमै: 120
धूषै: सुरभिभिर्मित्रं प्रदीपावलिभिर्मुदा । अर्चित्वाऽऽवेद्य ताम्बूलं गां च स्वागतमब्रवीत् 1221
कुचैलं मलिनं am fi धमनिसंततम्।देवी पर्यचरत् साक्षाच्चामरव्यजनेन 41231
अन्त:पुरजनो दृष्टा कृष्णेनामलकीर्तिना । विस्मितोऽभूदतिप्रीत्या अवधूतं सभाजितम् ।२४॥
fama कृतं पुण्यमवधूतेन भिक्षुणा । श्रिया हीनेन लोकेऽस्मिन् गर्हितेनाधमेन च 124)
योऽसौ त्रिलोकगुरुणा श्रीनिवासेन ` सम्भृत: । पर्यङ्कस्थां श्रियं हित्वा परिष्वक्तोऽप्रजो यथा । २६॥
कथयाञ्चक्रतुर्गाथा: gal गुरुकुले सतो: । आत्मनो ललिता राजन् करौ गृह्य परस्परम् ।२७॥

(O Pariksit, reaching Dwaraka), the Brahmana together with other Brahmanas passed
through three camps of guards and three protective walls (one after another), and then
reached the mansions occupied by the Andhaka and Vrsni chiefs, who followed the righteous
ways of the devotees of God, very difficult of access to ordinary people. (16) There was
situated (in the centre of that innermost ring of the city) the palace of Bhagavan Sri Krsna
containing the dwellings of His sixteen thousand and odd consorts. In one of them, which was
specially decorated, the Brahmana entered with the feelings of one who found himself
merged in the Bliss of God-realization. (17) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was at that time seated on
a couch with His consort Rukmini. Seeing the Brahmana from a distance, He suddenly rose
from His seat and advancing towards him, joyously folded him in both of his arms. (18)
(Pariksitl) the lotus-eyed Lord (who is the very embodiment of Bliss) felt extremely delighted
when He touched the body of His beloved friend, the Brahmana sage. Tears of joy began
to drop from His eyes. (19) (Taking the Brahmana by the hand) Sri Krsna, the purifier of the
world made His friend sit on His (own) couch, and bringing (Himself) all the articles necessary
for worship, washed the Brahmana's feet and sprinkled His head with the drops of that water.
(Then) He smeared the Brahmana's body with excellent perfumes as well as with the pastes
of sandal, aloe-wood and saffron. (20-21) Having joyfully worshipped His friend with scented
fumes and rows of lights, and offering him betel-leaf seasoned with catechu, lime, areca-nut
parings and cloves etc., and a cow, the Lofd greeted the Brahmana with sweet words. (22)
The Brahmana was ill-clad, with an unclean and emaciated body, the veins of which were
visible to the eyes. Queen Rukmini herself actually waited on him having the chowry before
him. (23) The women of the palace were astonished to see a naked Brahmana being so
lovingly honoured by Bhagavan Sn Krsna of spotless fame. (24) (They said to one another:—)
"What meritorious act was performed by this naked, destitute, condemned and lowly beggar
that the Lord of the three worlds, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, should receive him with such honour
and respect. Leaving Sri Rukmini, a manifestation of Goddess Laksmi Herself, who was
seated (with Him) in His bed, He embraced the Brahmana as if he were Lord Balarama
Himself." (25-26) Pariksit, taking each other by the hand, Bhagavan Sri Krsna and the
Brahmana recounted the sweet incidents of their boyhood, when they lived together in the
house of the same teacher. (27)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अपि ब्रह्मन् Teper wan लब्धदक्षिणात्। समावृत्तेन ada भार्योढा सदृशी न वा ied
प्रायो गृहेषु ते चित्तमकामविहतं तथा । नैवातिप्रीयसे विद्वन् धनेषु विदितं हि मे ।२९॥
केचित् कुर्वन्ति कर्माणि कामैरहतचेतस: । त्यजन्त: प्रकृतीर्दैवीर्यथाहं लोकसङ्ग्रहम् ।३०॥
