106 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

SE ICE OROR EIEIO OTN i WORE Rr WON) emt ah ना CO HTT ee ew का ना eon ee re ee ERE ONE ONT TE ROR न क जो नौ नो आ ता आ क नौ HE

स्वधिष्ण्यं प्रतपन् प्राणो बहिश्च प्रतपत्यसो । एवं विराजं प्रतपंस्तपत्यन्तर्वहि: पुमान् । १६।

सोऽमृतस्याभयस्येशो मर्त्यमन्नं यदत्यगात्। महिमेष ततो ब्रह्मन् पुरुषस्य दुरत्यय: ।१७।
पादेषु सर्वभूतानि ge: स्थितिपदो विदु: । अमृतं क्षेममभयं त्रिमूर्धोऽधायि मूर्धसु 1261
पादासत्रयो बहिश्चासन्नप्रजानां य आश्रमा:। अन्तस्रिलोक्यास्त्वपरो गृहमेधोऽबृहद्व्रत: ।१९।
सृती विचक्रमे faye WERE उभे। यदविद्या च विद्या च पुरुषस्तूभयाश्रय: । २०।
यस्मादण्डं fae जज्ञे भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मक: | तद् द्रव्यमत्यगाद् fad गोभि: सूर्य इवातपन् । २१।

Brahma continued : The mouth of the Cosmic Being is the birth-place of the organ of
speech as well as of the god of fire (the deity presiding over it;) the seven Dhatus or essential
ingredients of His Body (viz., skin, flesh, blood, fat, marrow, sinew and bone) are the source
of the seven Vedic metres (viz., Gayatri, Jagati, Usnik, Tristubh, Anustubh, Pankti and
Brhati); and even so His tongue is the source of all kinds of food—the food of the gods, the
food of the manes and the remains of both (which is like ambrosia for human beings)—of the
six varieties of taste, as well as of the sense of taste, and the birth-place of Varuna (the deity
presiding over the same). (1) His nostrils are the excellent source of all the five kinds of vital
airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udanaand Samana) as wellas of the element of air; similarly
His olfactory sense is the birth-place of the twin-gods, Aéwins (the celestial physicians) and
the source of all kinds of foodgrains, as well as of all ordinary and special odours. (2) His
sense of sight is the source of all colours as well as of the lights that reveal them; while His
eyes are the source of heaven and the birth-place of the sun. Even so His ears are the source
of the four cardinal points as well as of all sacred places; His sense of hearing, of ether and
its special characteristic, sound, while His limbs are the source of the essence of all things,
and the receptacle of all loveliness. (3) His sense of touch is the source of touch as well as
of the element of air and even so of all kinds of sacrificial performances. Similarly the hair
on His body are the source of all kinds of trees and plants or (according to another view) of
such of them as contribute to the performance of sacrifices. (4) His hair are the source of
clouds and His beard and moustaches, of lightning; while the nails of His fingers and toes
are the source of rocks and iron. Similarly His arms are the birth-place of the guardians of
spheres, who are mostly engaged in the work of protecting the universe. (5) His stride is the
support of the three worlds—the earth, the region of the air and heaven; while Sri Hari's feet
are the source of security and protection as also the place where all one's desired objects
can be had. (6) The penis of the Cosmic Being is the source of water, the seminal fluid and
creation, and the birth-place of the god of rain as well as of Prajapati (the god presiding over
creation); while His faculty of generation is the source of delight resulting from copulation
for the sake of offspring. (7) Even so His organ of excretion, O Narada, is the birth-place of
Yama (the god of retribution) as well as of the god Mitra, and the origin of the function of
evacuating the bowels; while His anus has been spoken of as the source of all destruction
of life, the origin of hell and the birth-place of Mrtyu (the god of death) as well as of Nirrti (the
goddess of poverty). (8) His back is the source of defeat and unrighteousness, as well as of
Tamas (the principle of darkness or opacity). His arteries and veins are the source of big and
small rivers, while the system of His bones is the source of mountains. (9) The abdomen of
the Cosmic Being is known to be the source of the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter), the chyle
and the oceans and the origin of all beings as well as of their dissolution; while His heart is
reputed to be the source of the mind. (10) Even so the Citta (Reason) of the Supreme is the
excellent source of Dharma (righteousness and the god presiding over it), myself (Brahma),
yourself (Narada), Sanaka andhis three brothers (Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanatkumara)
and Lord Siva. as also of Vijfiana (understanding) and the faculty of reason. (11) Myself and
