16 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

TSE ET EREN CORRE ECtEE te चिनने विरै LASS PSEARE AL ESEES CALE TEASE ET OEE ८8

अम्भसा केवलेनाथ करिष्ये व्रतपारणम्। प्राहुरब्भक्षणं fast we नाझितं च तत् ।४०॥
इत्यप: sre राजर्षिश्चिन्तयन् मनसाच्युतम्। प्रत्यचष्ट कुरुश्रेष्ठ द्विजागमनमेव स: ।४१॥
दुर्वासा यमुनाकूलात् कृतावश्यक आगत: | राज्ञाभिनन्दितस्तस्य बुबुधे चेष्टितं धिया sei
मन्युना प्रचलद्गात्रो भ्रुकुटीकुटिलानन:। बुभुक्षितश्च सुतरां कृताञ्जलिमभाषत ive |
अहो अस्य Rive श्रियोन्मत्तस्य weal धर्मव्यतिक्रमं विष्णोरभक्तस्येञ्नमानिन: ।४४॥
at मामतिथिमायातमातिथ्येन निमन्त्य a1 seat भुक्तवांस्तस्य सद्यस्ते दर्शये फलम् ।॥४५॥
एवं gam उत्कृत्य जटां रोषविदीपित: । तया स निर्ममे तस्मै Heat कालानलोपमाम् । ४६
तामापत्तन्तीं ज्वलतीमसिहस्तां पदा भुवम्।वेपयन्तीं समुद्वीक्ष्य न चचाल पदान्नृप: 1X91
प्राग्दिष्टं भृत्यरक्षायां पुरुषेण महात्मना । ददाह कृत्यां तां चक्रं क्रुद्धाहिमिव पावक: ।४८॥
तदभिद्रवदुद्बीक्ष्य स्वप्रयासं च निष्फलम्। दुर्वासा aga ait दिक्षु प्राणपरीप्सया । ४९1
Wragg भगवद्रथाङ्गं दावाग्मिरुद्धूतशिखो यथाहिम् ।
तथानुषक्तं मुनिरीक्षमाणो गुहां विविक्षु प्रससार मेरो: ।५०॥
Rat नभ: ant विवरान् समुद्रांल्लोकान् सपालां सिदिवं WA: स: ।
यतोयतोधावतितत्रतत्रर्व्यदुष्प्रसहंददर्शं।५१।
अलब्धनाथ A यदा कुतश्चित् संत्रस्तचित्तोऽरणमेषमाण: |
देवे विरिञ्चं ame विधातस्तराह्यात्मयोनेऽजिततेजसो माम् ।५२॥
(Putting off his meal,) the king honoured the newcomer by rising from his seat, offering
a (high) seat and other articles of worship and, approaching (bowing at) the soles of his feet,
prayed him to dine. (36) Having gladly accepted his prayer, the sage went (out) to finish his
routine work (for midday, viz., bathing and devotions) and, fixing his mind on the Infinite,
plunged into the sacred water of the KAlindi (fora bath). (37) Since (only) half a Muhdrta (or
twenty-four minutes) was left of the twelfth day (and it was necessary to conclude the fast
during the hours of the Dwadaéi itself), Ambarisa (who knew what was right) began to
deliberate with the Brahmanas on the question of concluding the fast in the face of such a
moral crisis (conflict of duties). (38) (He said:) “Since there is sin in showing disrespect to
a Brahmana (by invitinghimtoa dinner in the first instance and then taking one's meal before
feeding him) and there is (also) sin in not concluding one's fast (for the Ekadagi day) within
(the hours of) the (following) Dwadasi, Pray, tell me a course of action consequent upon
which good may betide me and sin may not touch me. (39) (Then, arriving at a conclusion
in consultation with the Brahmanas, he said to himself,) Since to take water—so declare the
Brahmanas—that is as good as taking food (for the purpose of breaking one's fast) and at
the same time it is no eating, hence | shall break my fast with water alone."* (40) Having
thus taken water and contemplating on the immortal Lord with his mind, that royal sage
(Ambarisa) only awaited, O jewel of the Kurus, the return of the Brahmana (the sage
Durvasa). (41) Having gone through his (midday) routine, the sage Durvasa (too) returned
(in the meanwhile) from the bank of the Yamuna and, (even when) greeted by the king, came
to know his act (of drinking water) by intuition. (42) With (all) his limbs shaking through rage
and with a face (looking) curved due to a frown, the sage, who was (feeling) extremely
hungry too, spoke (as follows) with reference to the emperor, who stood with joined palms

(before the sage):—(43) ‘Oh, look at the violation of Dharma (the principles of righteousness)
on the part of this cruel monarch, intoxicated with fortune and lacking in devotion to Lord

* The Stuti also says: अपोऽश्नाति तन्रैवाशितं नैवानशितम्`।
