638 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

SARA A ARTA Eee ESLER ES ELE SAA ANELE AEH EE HLORA TORAH ERE IN

Hence, women devoted to their husband and desirous of blessedness, O fair one, worship
their husband as (an image) of God, the Soul of the universe, with undivided loyalty. (35)
Therefore, devoutly worshipped by you, O blessed one, with such God-consciousness, |
shall forthwith accomplish your desired object, which is something very difficult to attain for
unchaste women. (36)

दितिरुवाच

वरदो यदि मे ब्रह्मन् पुत्रमिन्द्रहणं वृणे । अमृत्युं मृतपुत्राहं येन मे घातितौ सुतौ ।३७।

Diti replied : If you would confer on me the boon of my choice, O holy one, I—who have
lost my sons—seek (of you) an immortal son capable of slaying Indra, who caused both of
my sons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) to be slain (by Lord Visnu). (37)

frera ag fast विमना: पर्यतप्यत। अहो अधर्म: सुमहानद्य मे समुपस्थित: ।३८॥
अहो अद्येन्द्रयारामो योषिन्मय्येह मायया । गृहीतचेता: कृपण: पतिष्ये नरके ध्रुवम् । ३९1
कोऽतिक्रमोऽनुवर्तन्या: स्वभावमिह योषित: | fire मां बताबुधं स्वार्थे यदहं त्वजितेन्द्रिय: 1x0 |

` शरत्पद्मोत्सवं ae वचश्च श्रवणामृतम्।हृदयं क्षुरधाराभं aim को ae चेष्टितम् ise!

न fe isha: स्रीणामञ्जसा स्वाशिषात्मनाम् । पतिं पुत्रं भ्रातरं वा Hae घातयन्ति च ।४२॥
प्रतिश्रुतं ददामीति- वचस्तन्न मृषा भवेत्।वधं arf चेन्द्रोऽपि तत्रेदमुपकल्पते ।४३॥
sft संचिन्त्य भगवान्मारीच: कुरुनन्दन | उवाच किञ्चित् pita आत्मानं च विगर्हयन् ।`४४1

Hearing her prayer, the Brahmana sage (Kasyapa) became sad and fella repenting. (He
said to himself,) "Alas | a very great sin has overtaken me today. (38) Oh, given up to the
gratification on my senses, |, a wretched fellow—whose mind has been caught in the grip
of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in the form of woman today—shall surely fall into (the
abyss of) hell. (39) What fault is there of the woman, who has (but) followed her own nature
in this matter ? But fie upon me, ignorant that | am alas ! of my own (real) interests, as (is
clear from the fact that) | have not been able to conquer my mind. (40) The face of women
is blooming like the autumnal lotus and their speech is nectar (itself) to the ears, while their
heartis (cruel) as the blade of a razor. Who can know their ways १ (41) None is truly beloved
of women; who have their mind (thought) fixed on the object of their own desire. To serve
their (own) end they murder or cause to be murdered their own husband, son and
brother.(42) My plighted word, that | shall confer (on her) the boon of her choice, should not
prove untrue; and Indra too does not deserve death. Under such circumstances the
expedient that | have hit upon is (quite) in the fitness of things”. (43) Pondering thus, the
glorious sage Kasyapa (the son of Marici), O Pariksit (the delight of the Kurus), spoke a bit
angrily, condemning himself at the same time. (44)

Peay Sara
we भविता भद्रे इन्द्रहा देवबान्धव: । संवत्सरं ब्रतमिदं aan धारयिष्यसि iv!

Kagyapa said : A son will be born to you. O blessed one, who will slay Indra if you will
duly observe this vow for a year, but who will prove to bea friendof the gods if itis not properly

observed. (45)

धारयिष्ये wt ब्रह्मन्ब्रूहि कार्याणि यानि मे । यानि चेह निषिद्धानि न ad wha यानि तु ive!

Diti replied : | shall (certainly) observe the vow, O holy Brahmana | (Kindly) tell me (all)
that has to be done by me and all that is prohibited during the period of this vow, and also
that which (though not obligatory) may not violate the vow (if done). (46)
