Dis. 3] .. . “BOOK TWO 97

जत्री रैङ तीत्री RC RR MS A BER RR TTT Ee FoR NH RAT HH ERR HON HH RT ERO HT He a ae

fas बतोरुक्रमविक्रमान् 4 न Aaa: कर्णपुटे नरस्य ।
जिह्वासर्तो दार्दुरिकिव सूत न चोपगायत्युरुगायगाथा: io!
परॆ पट्टकिरीटजुष्टमप्युत्तमाङ्गे न नमेन्मुकुन्दम्।
ज्ञावौ at नो कुरुत: सपर्यां हरेर्लसत्काञ्चनकङ्कणौ वा । २१
बर्हायिते a नयने नराणां लिङ्गांनि विष्णोर्न निरीक्षतो ये ।
at qt तौ द्रुमजन्मभाजो क्षेत्राणि नानुव्रजतो हरेर्यो 1221
ज्ञीवञ्छ्वो भागवताङ्ध्रिरेणुं न जातु मर्त्यऽभिलभेत सयस्तु ।
श्रीविष्णुपद्या मनुजस्तुलस्या: श्वसञ्छ्वो यस्तु न ae गन्धम् ।२३॥
न विक्रियेताथ यदा विकारो नेत्रे जलं गात्ररुहेषु हर्ष: । २४॥।

यदाह वैयासकिरात्मविद्याविशारदो नृपति साधु पृष्ट: ।२५॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवत महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वितायस्कन्धे तृतीयाऽध्याय: ।३।

Saunaka said : On hearing these words of Suka what else did king Pariksit, the foremost
of the Bharatas, then ask the son of Vyasa, who was not only a seer but well-versed in the
Vedas too ? (13) Suta, learned as you are, kindly reveal all that to us, who are keen to hear
the same. For in an assembly of holy men there must be talks that ultimately lead to
discourses on Sri Hari. (14) That great car-warrior, king Pariksit (a descendant of Pandu)
was a great devotee of the Lord. Playing with toys loved by children, he made the worship
of Sri Krsna as one of his sports. (15) The holy Suka (the son of Vyasa) is also exclusively
devoted to Lord Vasudeva (Sri Krsna); and it is but natural that where holy men meet there
are sublime talks saturated with the virtues of the Lord, whose praises are sung by exalted
souls well-versed in the Vedas. (16) The rising and setting sun steals away (in vain) the life
of all human beings except that of the man who spends even a single momentin talks about
the Lord of excellent fame. (17) Do not trees live ? Do not bellows also breathe ? And do not
the other domestic animals (other than the human beast) take their food and copulate ? (18)
The human beast who has never heard the story of Sri Krsna (the elder brother of Gada) has
been declared to be as good as a dog, a swine, a camel and a donkey. (19) The ears ofa
man who does not hear (the stories of) the exploits of the Lord (whose doings are marvellous)
are mere holes (that serve no useful purpose); and his tongue is as bad as that of a frog if
itdoes not recount the stories of Lord Visnu (who is extolled in numerous ways). (20) A head
which, though decked with a silk turban or a crown, never bows to Lord Mukunda (the
Bestower of Liberation), is only a burden. Even so the hands which, though adorned with
wristlets of gold, never offer worship to Sri Hari are as good as those of adead man. (21) And
those human eyes that do not gaze on the images of Lord Visnu are as useless as the eyes
on the tail of a peacock. Similarly, the human feet which do not visit places sacred to Sri Hari
are as good as the roots of trees. (22) A mortal who has never bathed himself in the dust from
the feet of the Lord's devotees is really dead, though living; even so the man who has never
known the fragrance of the sacred Tulasi (basil) leaves offered at the feet of Lord Visnu is
like a breathing corpse. (23) A heart which does not melt when Sri Hari's names are being
uttered (either by oneself or by others) is hard like stone. And when the heart melts, tears
rush to one's eyes and the hair stand erect. (24) Dear Suta, what you say is most agreeable
to the mind. Now tell us what Sri Suka (the son of Vyasa), the foremost of devotees and
