Dis. 1] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA

Be RCROME WAT BH RS PWR He Me Re Me GEER BEE Me Wee eM eM Be Be Me Re By Re Re Or Nr He eR Re Be Re By Pee Be BC He i Bi Oe Re CR PR

consciousness and (at other times) wept before them.(39) She looked all around in search
of the Lord (the protector of her body). She was being fanned and admonished by hundreds
of women again and again. (40) Seeing this from a distance,! for my part went near her out of
curiosity. The girl rose to see me and, agitated in mind, spoke (to me) in the following words. (41)

बालोवाच
भो भो: साधो क्षणं firs मच्चिन्तामपि नाहाय । दर्शनं aa लोकस्य सर्वथाघहरं amis!
बहुधा तव वाक्येन दु:खशान्तिर्भविष्यति। यदा भाग्यं भवेद्भूरिं भवतो दर्शानं तदा ।४३।
The girl said : Hullo, stay a while, O pious soul ! and put an end to my worry too. Your
(very) sight is the best means of completely driving away the sins of the world. (42) My grief

will be assuaged to a great extent by your admonition. Then (alone) does your sight fall to
one's lot when there is great luck. (43)

IG SAT
कासि त्वं काविमौ चेमा नार्य: का: पद्मलोचना: | वद देवि सविस्तारं स्वस्य दु:खस्य कारणम् ।४४॥
Narada said: Whoare you? Howare these two menrelated to you? who are these lotus-
eyed girls (standing beside you)? Point out in detail the cause of your misery, O worshipful
lady ! (44)
बालोवाच
अहं भक्तिरिति wan gat a aaa मतो । ज्ञानवैराग्यनामानौ कालयोगेन जर्जरौ ul
गङ्गाद्या: सरितश्चैमा मत्सेवार्थं समागता:। तथापि न च A se: सेविताया: सुरैरपि ives
इदानीं श्रृणु मद्वार्तां सचित्तस्त्वं तपोधन । वार्ता मे वितताप्यस्ति at श्रुत्वा सुखमावह ।४७।

The girl replied : |am known by the name of Bhakti (Devotion). These two are regarded
as my sons. They are Jhana (spiritual enlightenment) and Vairagya (dispassion) by name
and have become worn out by the process of time. (45) These girls, again, are the rivers
Ganga and others, gathered together (in living forms) for doing service to me. Yet happiness
does not come to me, even though | am waited upon by celestial damsels. (46) Now hear
you my story with an attentive mind, O sage rich in askesis ! My tale is a long one too; (yet)
hear it and give me (some) solace. (47)

उत्पन्ना द्रविडे साहं वृद्धिं कर्णाटके गता । क्वचित्कचिन्महाराष्टे गुर्जरे जीर्णतां गता isc!

तत्र घोरकलेर्योगात्पाखण्डै:; खण्डिताङ्गका । दुर्बलाहं fat याता पुत्राभ्यां ae मन्दताम् ।४९।

वृन्दावनं पुन: प्राप्य नवीनेव सुरूपिणी । जाताहं युवती सम्यक्पेष्ठरूपा तु साम्प्रतम् । ko |

इमो तु शयितावत्र सुतौ A क्लिश्यत: श्रमात्।इदं स्थानं परित्यज्य विदेशं गम्यते मया । ५१॥

Woe समायातौ a दु:खेन दु:खिता । साहं तु तरुणी Hera वृद्धाविमौ कुत: 1421

त्रयाणां सहचारित्वाद्वैपरीत्यं ga: स्थितम्।घटते Wor माता तरुणौ तनयाविति । ५३।

अत: arate चात्मानं विस्मयाविष्टमानसा ae योगनिधे धीमन् कारणं चात्र किं भवेत् ux
Such as | am, | was bornin the Dravida country and attained maturity in Karnataka. | was
respected here and there in Maharastra and attained a ripe age in Gujarat. (48) Mutilated by

heretics due to the arrival of the fearful age of Kali, and continuing in the state for along time,
| grew weak and developed sluggishness alongwith my two sons.(49) Reaching Vrndavana,
