348 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

RE RO BEER SHEE EEE HELE CHEE CEH ESE EL EEE EEE HERE SHEET OH HAH ETR LEO ERE HS ee

the moon, revolve round that realm, placing it on their right. (25) Take up your residence in
that supreme Abode of Lord Visnu, which is worthy of adoration for all the worlds and has
never been attained to by your forbears or even others, dear Dhruva ! (26) Be pleased to
mount, O long-lived one ! this excellent aerial car, despatched (for you) by the Lord, the
foremost among those enjoying the highest renown. (27)

मेत्रेय उवाच
कृताभिषेक: कृतनित्यमङ्गलो मुनीन् प्रणम्याशिषमभ्यवादयत्।२८॥
परीत्याभ्यर्च्य धिष्ण्याग्र्यं पार्षदावभिवन्द्य च । इयेष तदधिष्ठातुं बिभ्रद्रूपं हिरण्मयम् ।२९॥
तदोत्तानपद: पुत्रो ददर्शान्तकप।गतम | yeaa Ue दत्त्वा aetna गृहम् 1301
तदा दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्मृदङ्गपणवादय: । गन्धर्वमुख्या: प्रजगु: पेतु: कुसुमवृष्टय: 1321
Maitreya resumed : On hearing the above words of the two chief servants of Lord
Visnu—words, which dropped nectar (as it were), Dhruva, a beloved devotee of the Lord
(who took wide strides in order to rob Bali of his sovereignty of the three worlds) performed
his ablutions, finished his daily routine (of devotions) and adorned his person and, having
bowed low to the sages (residing in that hermitage), he drew forth their benediction. (28)
Having worshipped and gone round (from left to right) that excellent aerial car and made
obeisance to the two divine attendants, and endowed with a (divine) form shining like gold,
he felt inclined to mount it. (29) In the meantime Dhruva (the son of Uttanapada) saw Death
arrived (there) and, having set his foot on the latter's head, stepped into the wonderful
car.(30) At the moment kettledrums as well as drums and tabors etc., sounded (of their own
accord), the chief among the Gandharvas (celestial songsters) loudly sang and showers of
flowers rained (on Dhruva). (31)
स च स्वर्लोकमारोक्ष्यन् सुनीतिं जननीं ga: । अन्वस्मरदगं हित्वा dai यास्ये त्रिविष्टपम् 1321
इति व्यवसितं qe व्यवसाय सुरोत्तमो । दर्शयामासतुर्देवीं gi यानेन गच्छतीम् ।३३॥
wa aa प्रजंसद्भि: पथि amie: gt: । अवकीर्यमाणो ददूशे कुसुमै: Haat ग्रहान् । ३४॥
त्रिलोकीं देवयानेन सोऽतिव्रज्य मुनीनपि । one ध्रुवगतिर्विष्णो: पदमथाभ्यगात् ।३५॥
यन्नाव्रजञ्जन्तुषु येऽननुग्रहा sara sai चरन्ति ashe ।३६॥
Ura: AAT: Yel सर्वभूतानुरञ्जना: | यान्त्यञ्जसाच्युतपदमच्युतप्रियबान्धवा: 139 |
As he was about to soar for the divine realm, Dhruva recalled his mother Suniti, and said
to himself, “Shall | have to proceed to the inaccessible heaven, leaving my poor mother
behind ?“ (32) Having read his mind as depicted above, the two foremost divinities showed
the shining lady going ahead (of Dhruva) in another aerial car. (33) Greeted at every stage
onthe route with showers of flowers by gods shouting applause from theiraerialcars, he saw
(went past) the planets one after another. (34) Passing beyond the three worlds (the earth,
the intermediate region and the celestial world) as well as beyond (the region of) the seven
seers by the route of the gods, Dhruva, who had attained the eternal state, eventually
reached the Abode of Lord Visnu, lying still further. (35) That realm of Lord Visnu shines all
round by its own splendour; nay, even the three worlds (referred to above) merely reflect its
light. They who are lacking compassion for (other) living beings have never attained to it; they
alone reach it who ceaselessly perform benevolent deeds. (36) They who are calm and
collected and look upon others with the same eye, nay, who are pure (of body and mind) and

