262 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 38

WRAL RRR RAR RRB BR aed ate te ee EEE ORS OE Se ee ee sewes १११ न न eer ee Tee

देहंभृतामियानर्थो हित्वा दम्भं भियं शुचम्। संदेशाद् यो हरेर्लिङ्गदर्शनश्रवणादिभि: 1201
Sri Suka continued ; Thus contemplating on Sri Krsna all the way, Akrira (the son of
Swaphalka) arrived in Vraja in the chariot, while the sun reached the westem hill (horizon),
0 protector of men. (24) He beheld in Vraja the footprints of Sri Krsna—the sacred dust of
whose feet is borne on their crown by the guardians of all the worlds—which served as the
ornaments of the earth and were distinguished by the marks of a lotus, a grain of barley, a
goad and so on. (25) His impatience having been immensely heightened by the joy derived
from their sight, his hair standing on end through love and his eyes bedimmed with tear-
drops, he jumped down from the chariot and rolled on the footprints exclaiming, "Oh! these
are the particles of dust of the Lord's feet !" (26) This much is the end to be attained by those
invested with a body, viz., that giving up hypocrisy, fear and worry, they should cultivate
through the sight of Sri Hari’s images, the hearing of His praises and so on that ecstatic mood

which was felt by AkrUra from the time he received the mandate (from Karnsa). (27)

weal कृष्णं wi च as गोदोहनं गतौ । पीतनीलाम्बरधरौ शरदम्बुरुहेक्षणौ ।२८॥
किञशोरौ इयामलश्चेतौ श्रीनिकेतौ बृहद्भुजौ । सुमुखौ geet बालद्विरदविक्रमो ।२९।
ध्वजवज्राङ्कुशाम्भोजैश्चिह्नितैरङ्ध्रिभिर्व्रजम् ।झशोभयन्तौ महात्मानावनुक्रोशस्मितेक्षणौ 1301 ।
उदारुचिरक्रीडौ स्रग्विणौ वनमालिनौ । पुण्यगन्धानुलिप्ताङ्गौ erat विरजवाससौ 1391
प्रधानपुरुषावाद्यौ NST अवतीर्णौ जगत्यर्थे स्वांशेन बलकेशवौ 1321
feat वितिमिरा राजन् कुर्वाणौ प्रभया स्वया । यथा मारकत: Bet Tess कनकाचितो 1331
रथात्तूर्णमवप्नुत्य सोऽक्रूर: स्रेहविह्वल: । पपात चरणोपान्ते दण्डवद् रामकृष्णयो: ।३४॥
ध्ना।बद्दट्नि।ह्वङ्मबाष्पमयळ्ळिक्षण | पुलकाचिताङ्ग औत्कण्ट्यात् स्वाख्याने नाशकन्नृप 1341
भगवांस्तमभिप्रेत्य रथाङ्गाङ्कितपाणिना । परिरेभेऽभ्युपाकृष्य प्रीत: प्रणतवत्सल: ।३६॥
संकर्षणश्च प्रणतमुपगुह्य महामना: | गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणी अनयत् सानुजो गृहम् ।३७॥

(Presently) he saw in Vraja Sri Krsna and Balarama with eyes resembling a pair of
autumnal lotuses, (severally) wearing yellow and blue garments and present in the yard
where cows were milked. (28) They were (mere) lads, dark-brown and fair (in complexion
respectively) the abodes of grace, with long arms and a lovely countenance, the foremost
among the charming and having the prowess of young elephants. (29) The two high-souled
Brothers were gracing (the soil of) Vraja by Their feet distinguished with the marks of a flag,
the thunderbolt, a goad and a lotus and were casting (all round) glances accompanied with
smiles full of compassion. (30) Having bathed, they had put on immaculate clothes, were
besmeared all over with sandal-paste which emitted a delightful odour and adorned with
necklaces of jewels and garlands of sylvan flowers and were engaged in noble and charming
pastimes. (31) They were the two foremost and most ancient Persons, the Causes as well
as the Rulers of the universe, descended forthe sake of the worldin Their all-blissful essence
as Balarama and KeSava (Sri Krsna). (32) (Shining) like a rock of emerald and another of
silver, covered with gold, the two (divine) Brothers were ridding the quarters of their darkness
with Their own effulgence, O Pariksit ! (33) Hastily jumping down from the chariot and
overwhelmed with affection, the aforesaid AkrUra fell prostrate at the feet of Balarama and
Sri Krsna. (34) With his eyes blinded by tears of joy brought by the sight of the Lord and
his frame covered with bristling hair, he was unable even to introduce himself (by uttering
his name) due to his throat being choked (with emotion), O protector of men ! (35) Coming
to know him (as well as of his intention through inference), the Lord (who is so fond of those
who are bent low before Him), drew Akrdra towards and near Him with His hand

