SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 3

PB RRR ज WR HB BET कीं का ॐ सि ह ती GON BE BRR We RR RT RR RR HE Ba RE Be RT Be er BE Or HHT RE RET Re RR, । ३.३.३.३.३.३..॥

षष्ठे अत्रेरपत्यत्वे वृत: प्राप्तोऽनसूयया | आन्वीक्षिकीमलर्काय verre ऊचिवान् । ११।
Wa: सप्तम steal रुचेर्यज्ञोऽभ्यजायत। स यामाद्यै: सुरगणैरपात्स्वायम्भुवान्तरम् । १२॥
apn मेरुदेव्यां तु नाभेर्जात उरुक्रम: । दर्शयन् वर्त्म धीराणां सर्वाश्रमनमस्कृतम् । १३॥
ऋषिभिर्याचितो भेजे नवमं पार्थिवं aq: दुग्धेमामोषधीर्विप्रास्तेनायं स eR: । १४॥
wt स We ae चाक्षुषोदधिसम्प्रुवे। नाव्यारोप्य महीमय्यामपाद्वैवस्वतं मनुम् IR
सुरासुराणामुदधिं मध्नतां मन्दराचलम्।दध्रे कमठरूपेण yg एकादशे fay: eet
धान्वन्तरं qed त्रयोदशममेव च । अपाययत्सुरानन्यान्मोहिन्या मोहयन् स्रिया ।१७॥
ait नारसिंहं बिभ्रद्दैत्येन्द्रमूर्जितम्।ददार करजैर्वक्षस्येकां Hee ।१८॥
Wael «aah कृत्वागादध्वरं बले: । पदत्रयं याचमान: प्रत्यादित्सुस्रिविष्टपम् eet
अवतारे षोडशमे wa wale नृपान्। त्रि:सप्तकृत्व: कुपितो नि:क्षत्रामकरोन्महीम् । २०।
तत: सप्तदशो जात: सत्यवत्यां पराशरात्। चक्रे वेदतरो: wear दृष्वा पुंसोऽल्यमेधस: 1221
नरदेवत्वमापन्न: सुरकार्यचिकीर्षया । समुद्रनिग्रहादीनि चक्रे वीर्याण्यत: परम् । २२॥
Taree विंशतिमे वृष्णिषु प्राप्य जन्मनी । रामकृष्णाविति भुवो भगवानहरद्भरम् । २३॥

तत: कलौ सम्प्रवृत्ते सम्मोहाय सुरद्विषाम्। बुद्धौ नाम्नाजनसुत: कीकटेषु भविष्यति । २४
अथासौ युगसंध्यायां दस्युप्रायेषु राजसु। जनिता विष्णुयशसो नाम्ना कल्किर्जगत्पति: 1241

It was this very Lord (Narayana) who, first manifesting Himself as the Kumaras (Sanaka
and others), took the form of four Brahmanas and observed the hard vow of perpetual
celibacy. (6) During the second Avatara (manifestation) the Lord of all sacrifices assumed
the form of the divine Boar with a view to lifting the earth that had sunk into the lowest depths
of the ocean, in order to proceed with the work of creation. (7) Appearing in the person of
the celestial sage (Narada) in His third manifestation as a Rsi, He taught the Gospel of the
Vaisnavas (the Pafncaratra), which inculcates the method of doing things in such a way that
they may cease to bind us. (8) During His fourth manifestation, in which He was born of
Dharma's better half (Murti), He appeared in the dual form of the sages Nara and Narayana
and practised severe penance with perfect control of the mind and senses. (9) His fifth
manifestation was known by the name of Kapila, the lord of the Siddhas (perfect ones), who
taught to the sage Asuri the Sankhya system of philosophy, that determines the nature of
the fundamental principles and had been cast into oblivion through the ravages of time.(10)
During His sixth manifestation He appeared as a son of the sage Atri at the entreaty of
Anasuya (Atri's wife) and taught the Science of the Self to king Alarka, Prahlada and
others.(11)Thereafter in the seventh manifestation He was born Akiti, the spouse of Ruci
(one of the lords of created beings), as Yajfia; assisted by His sons Yama and the other gods
He held the office of Indra during the first Manwantara, presided over by Swayambhuva
Manu. (12) In the eighth manifestation (as Rsabhadeva) the all-pervading Lord was born of
queen Meru Devi, the spouse of king Nabhi, and taught by His own example the mode of life
of the Paramaharhsas (enlightened souls who have transcended all bounds of morality and
have no duty to perform), which is adored by men belonging to all the four Agramas or stages
oflife.(13) During His ninth descent, at the solicitation of the seers, He took the form of a king
(Prthu) and made the earth (in the form of a cow) yield all its products (which she had so
far withheld), and hence this particular manifestation of the Lord proved most propitious to
the world.(14) At the end of the Caksusa Manwantara, when all the three worlds were being
deluged by the ocean, He took the form ofa fish (during His tenth manifestation) and rescued
the future Vaivaswata Manu (the lord of the present Manwantara), picking him up on the
