Dis. 6 ] BOOK EIGHT 759

SR Bra He Ge RRR a FN Re RR He HB BE Ee RR eB Ee He RB EH HR EY Be HR Hr He SRY ORE EY Hi Be HM He Hr He A ATE

यथाग्निमेधस्यमृते च Wy भुव्यन्नमम्बूद्यमने च वृत्तिम्।
योगैर्मनुष्या अधियन्ति हि wi गुणेषु gem कवयो वदन्ति ।१२।
तं त्वा वयं नाथ समुज्जिहाने सरोजनाभातिचिरेप्सितार्थम् ।
gr ua निर्वृतिमद्य सर्वे गजा दवार्ता ga गाङ्गमम्भ: 1231
a त्वं विधत्स्वाखिललोकपाला वयं यदर्थास्तव पादमूलम्।
समागतास्ते बहिरन्तरात्मन् किं वान्यविज्ञाप्यमशेषसाक्षिण: ।१४॥
ae गिरित्रश्च सुरादयो ये दक्षादयोऽग्रेरिवि केतवस्ते ।
fe वा fate पृथग्विभाता far जं नो द्विजदेवमन्त्रम् ।१५॥

Brahma prayed: Hail, hail to You, the ocean of (unmixed) bliss in the form of final
beatitude, of whom birth, continuance and destruction have never been predicated, who
transcends the (three) Gunas, who is subtler than the subtle (most difficult to comprehend),
(the extent of) whose form cannot be actually measured and whose glory is inconceivable.(8)
This (divine) form of Yours, O supreme Person, deserves to be worshipped by (all) seekers
of blessedness through methods laid down in the Vedas and the Tantras (such as the
Paficaratra). Oh, in this form (of Yours), which embraces the (whole) universe, O Maker (of
all), | clearly perceive all at once ourselves (the gods) as well as (all) the three worlds. (9) In
You, who are (absolutely) independent, existed this universe at the beginning (before its
creation); in You (alone) it continued in the middle (of its existence) and in You (again) it will
get merged in the end (after its dissolution). (Nay,) You (alone) are the beginning, the middle
and the end of this cosmos, even as clay is in relation to a jar, since You are higher than the
highest (Prakrti). (10) Having created this universe by Your own Maya (creative energy),
depending on You, You have subsequently entered it (as its inner Controller). (Hence) the
wise, who are well-versed in the scriptures and have (duly) controlled their mind, perceive
You, with their mind, as unaffected by the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) even (though You
stand projected) in the universe (which is a product of those Gunas). (11) Even as (the
common run of) men obtain by proper means fire in a pair of wooden pieces, milk in (the
udders of) cows, foodgrains and water in the soil and livelihood through (personal) exertion,
so do the wise realize You in the (various) objects of the senses by (their purified) intellect
through the (various) means of God-Realization and (then) describe You (in terms of their
realization). (12) Having seen You as such, the object sought for (by us) very long since,
appearing in person (before us) today, O Lord with a lotus sprung from Yournavel, we have
all attained supreme bliss similar to the one which elephants oppressed by a forest
conflagration do on perceiving the water of the (holy) Ganga.(13) Accomplish You as such
the object for which we, the guardians of all the worlds, have duly sought the soles of Your
feet. O inner Self, whatis there to be made known outside by others to You, the all- witnessing
Lord ?(14) Appearing as distinct from You, like the sparks of a fire from the fire itself, how
can Lord Siva (the protector of mountains), myself (Brahma), the gods and other ethereal
beings, Daksa and other lords of created beings and whoever (else) there may be, know
(where lies) our welfare, O Lord ! (Therefore, pray,) impart to us the counsel that may be
beneficial to the Brahmanas and the gods (on whom depends the welfare of all others). (15)

श्रीरुक उवाच
एवं विरिञ्चादिभिरीडितस्तद् विज्ञाय तेषां ea तथैव ।
जगाद जीमूतगभीरया गिरा बद्धाञ्जलीन्संवृतसर्वकारकान् ।१६॥

एक एवेश्वरस्तस्मिन्सुरकार्ये सुरेश्वर: | विहर्तुकामस्तानाह समुद्रोन्मथनादिभि: । १७॥
