Dis. 24 ] BOOK NINE 95

HER OR Iie, dotatetrieteni tenner ren ot sn sR ee BE I HHH IR IR

Again, nine sons, Gada and others were obtained by Devaraksita through Vasudeva; (while)
he begot through Sahadeva eight sons, the foremost of whom was Puruvisruta, as Dharma
beg ot the (eight) Vasus themselves. Further the highminded Vasudeva begot through
Devaki (eight) more sons—Kirtiman, Susena, Bhadrasena, Bhadra, Aju, Sammardana and
Lord Sankarsana, who was the same as Sesa (the king of serpents); while the eighth son
of (the blessed) Vasudeva and Devaki indeed was Lord Sri Hari Himself. And the highly
blessed Subhadra, your grandmother, was their daughter, O king! (52—55)

यदा wes धर्मस्य क्षयो वृद्धिश्च पाप्मन: । तदा तु भगवानीश आत्मानं सृजते हरि: । ५६1
न ga जन्मनो हेतु: कर्मणो वा महीपते । आत्ममायां विनेशस्य परस्य द्रष्टुरात्मन: 1491
यन्मायाचेष्टितं पुंस: स्थित्युत्पतत्यप्ययाय हि । अनुग्रहस्तन्निवृत्तेरात्मलाभाव चेष्यते । ५८॥
अक्षौहिणीनां पतिभिरसुरैर्नृपलाञ्छनै: | भुव आक्रम्यमाणाया आभाराय कृतोद्यम: 1५९1
कर्माण्यपरिमेयाणि मनसापि सुरेश्वरे: । सहसंकर्षणश्चक्रे भगवान् मधुसूदन: ।६०॥
कलौ जनिष्यमाणानां दु:खञ्चोकतमोनुदम्। अनुग्रहाय भक्तानां सुपुण्यं व्यतनोद् a: ।६१॥
यस्मिन् सत्कर्णपीयूषे यजस्तीर्थवरे सकृत्। श्रोत्राञ्जलिरुपस्पृशय धुनुते कर्मवासनाम् । ६२॥
भोजवृष्ण्यन्धकमधुज्यूरसेनदशार्हकै: । श्लाघनीयेहित: शाश्वत् कुरुसृञ्जयपाण्डुभि: 1831
स्निग्धस्मितेक्षितोदारैर्वाक्यैर्विक्रमलीलया । नृलोके रमयामास yet सर्वाङ्गरम्यया । ६४॥

Tard मकरकुण्डलचारुकर्णभ्राजत्कपोलसुभगं सविलासहासम् |

नित्योत्सवं न ततृपुर्दृशिभि: पिबन्त्यो arti ang मुदिता: कुपिता निमेश्च । ६५॥

जातो wa: पितॄगृहाद् व्रजमेधितार्थो हत्वा ga सुतज्ञतानि कृतोरुदार: |

उत्पाद्य तेषु पुरुष: क्रतुभि: समीजे आत्मानमात्मनिगमं प्रथयज्जनेषु । ६६।

पृथ्व्या: स वै गुरुभरं क्षपयन् कुरूणामन्त:समुत्थकलिना युधि भूपचम्व: |

aan विधूय विजये जयमुद्विघोष्य प्रोच्योद्धवाय च परं समगात् स्वधाम 1६७1

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे वैयासिक्यामष्टादगसाहस्रूयां पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे

ASG

Whenever there is decline of virtue and growth of sin in this world, the almighty Lord Si
Hari actually manifests Himself at that time. (56) Indeed, for the appearance and actions of
the all-pervading Lord Sri Hari, the (absolutely) unattached witness, O ruler of the earth,
there is no ground other than His own will to sport. (57) For, the activity of His Maya (deluding
potency) conduces to the birth, continuance and destruction of every embodied soul; while
His grace is intended to bring Self-Realization through cessation of birth. (58) Endeavouring
to remove the burden of the earth, which was overrun by demons disguised as kings, who
led more than one Aksauhinis, Lord Sri Krsna (the slayer of the demon Madhu),
accompanied by (His elder brother) Lord Sarnkarsana (better known as Balarama),
performed deeds which cannot be comprehended even in thought by the rulers of gods. (59-60)
‘Nay,) in order to shower His grace on the devotees He spread far and wide (through those
deeds) a most sacred glory capable of driving away the sorrow, grief and ignorance of those
