Dis. 13 } BOOK ELEVEN 573

PARDO RENAE NERA DESH EAT EDEN CRORES RR OR ERNST ककक १9 .१४### 99 He

objects and the mind both (however) constitute the body (i.e., an adjunct and not the
essence) of the Jiva, which is essentially the same as | (so that there is no real affinity
between the Jiva, on the one hand, and the sense-objects and the mind, on the other, which
can therefore be easily transcended by the Jiva by contemplating on its divine essence, its
identity with Brahma. (25) Becoming one with Me (and thus realizing its own true nature), the
Jiva should (therefore) give up both—viz., the mind clinging to the sense-objects as a result
of repeatedly enjoying them and the sense-objects that get imprinted on it (in the form of
latencies). (26) Wakefulness, the dream state and deep slumber are the (three) states ofthe
mind (and not of the Jiva), following from (the preponderance of) the (three) Gunas, (Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas respectively). The Jiva, however, is conclusively known to be distinct from
them as being their witness. (27) Since this identification of the soul with Buddhi (which is
responsible for its transmigration) attributes to it the functions of the (three) Gunas, therefore,
getting established in Me, the transcendent Brahma (which lies beyond the three states of
wakefulness etc.), the Jiva should shake off this identification. Thereafter follows the
(mutual) divorce of the sense-objects and the mind. (28) Realizing the bondage of the soul—
occasioned by self-identification with one’s psycho-physical organism—to be the source of
evil (in the shape of obscuring one’s blissful nature), and feeling disgusted with it, one should
get established in the fourth (transcendent) principle and give up identification with the body
etc., (which is responsible for the transmigration of the soul) and the resultant thought of
gratifying the self. (29) So long as the sense of reality of diverse objects does not disappear
from the mind of man through arguments, the fool continues to sleep even though he is
awake, just like the man whois waking ina dream. (30) (Objective entities like the body) other
than the Self having no existence, the differences (of Varna, Agrama and soon) occasioned
by them, the (various) destinies (such as the enjoyments of heaven, to be attained by men
after death and described in the Vedas) and their causes (in the shape of good and evil
actions of various kinds) are (all) unreal with the Self as things seen by a dreaming man, (31)
He who while waking perceives outside himself through all his senses objects having
properties changing every moment, (nay,) who experiences within his heartin a dream things
(shaped by his Vasanas or cravings and) similar to those perceived tn the waking state and
who in deep slumber withdraws them (all) is one and the same, connected as he is with all
the states by memory as their witness and as the controller of the senses. (32) Pondering
thus and arriving at the following conclusion about the nature of the Self that the three states
of the mind (referred to heretofore and) traceable to the (three) Gunas (or modes of Prakrti)
are superimposed on Me (appearing as the Jiva) by My deluding potency (veiling My true
nature), cut at the root of egotism, the basis of all doubts (as to whether the soul is different
from the body etc., or one with it, whether it is one or there is a plurality of souls and so on)
with the sword of wisdom whetted by reasoning, the precepts of saints and the Sruti texts,
and betake yourselves to Me seated in your (very) heart. (33)

ईक्षेत विभ्रममिदं मनसो faerd दृष्टं विनष्टमतिलोलमलातचक्रम् ।
विज्ञानमेकमुरुधेव विभाति माया स्वप्नस्रिधा गुणविसर्गकृतो विकल्प: ।३४॥
संदृश्यते क्व च यदीदमवस्तुबुद्ध्या त्यक्तं भ्रमाय न भवेत् स्मृतिरानिपातात् । ३५॥
देहं च नश्वरमवस्थितमुत्थितं वा सिद्धो न पर्यति यतोऽध्यगमत् स्वरूपम् |
दैवादपेतमुत दैववञादुपेते वासो यथा परिकृतं मदिरामदान्ध: ।३६॥
देहोऽपि gaa: we ad यावत् स्वारम्भकं प्रतिसमीक्षत एव सासु: |
a सप्रपञ्चमधिरूढसमाधियोग: स्वाप्नं पुनर्न भजते प्रतिबुद्धवस्तु: ॥३७॥
