Dis. 39] BOOK TEN 267

AT Ser SOROS SE SEE str st STR re ots rr HH EH I HH HINER,

we, O cowherd women, be able in fact to get over the anguish of separation—which is so
difficult to overcome—without Him in whose company a number of nights were spent by us
as an instant in the Rasa assembly enlivened by His winsome smiles, charming whispers,
playful glances and embraces, all of which were inspired by His love ? (29) Howcan we really
survive without Him who—while entering Vraja at the close of the day, accompanied by
Balarama (who is possessed of infinite strength) and surrounded by cowherd boys and
playing on the flute, His curly locks and wreaths of flowers covered all over with the dust
raised by the hoofs of the cows—used to captivate our mind with His sidelong glances full
of smiles? (30)

AY उवाच
एवं gam विरहातुरा sa aakea: कृष्णविषक्तमानसा: |
विसृज्य wat रुरुदु: स्म सुस्वरं गोविन्द दामोदर माधवेति 132)

स्रीणामेवं owas सवितर्यथ । अक्रूरश्चोदयामास कृतमैत्रादिको रथम् ।३२।
गोपास्तमन्वसजन्त नन्दाद्या:; ङाकटैस्तत: | आदायोपायनं भूरि कुम्भान् गोरससम्भृतान् । ३३॥

Treg da कृष्णमनुव्रज्यानुरञ्जिता: ।।प्रत्यादेशं भगवत: काङ्षन्यश्चावततस्थिरे ।३४॥

wea तप्यतीर्वीक्ष्य स्वप्रस्थाने चदूत्तम: । सान्त्वयामास सप्रेमैरायास्य git दौत्यकै: 1341

चावदालक्ष्यते केतुर्यावद् रेणू we च । अनुप्रस्थापितात्मानो लेख्यानीवोपलक्षिता: 1361

ता निराज्ञा निववृतुर्गोविन्दविमिवर्तने। विज्ञोका अहनी निन्युर्गायन्त्य: प्रियचेष्टितम् । ३७॥
SriSuka went on: Talking (to one another) in this strain and sore afflicted at the thought
of separation, the women of Vraja—whose mind was deeply attached to Sri Krsna—cried
loudly, casting all bashfulness to the winds, “O Protector of cows, O Krsna (who was tied at
the waist with a string by mother Yagoda), O Scion of Madhu!" (31) In spite of the womenfolk
(of Vraja) wailing as aforesaid, now that the sun had risen, Akrura—who had (just) finished
his (Sandhya) prayers to the sun-god and other devotions—presently drove his chariot (in
the direction of Mathura). (32) The Gopas headed by Nanda thereupon closely followed him
in their bullock-carts taking (with them) abundant presents including pitchers full of the yield
of cows (in the shape of milk, curds and ghee). (33) The cowherd women too followed their
beloved Sri Krsna (to a short distance) and delighted (to some extent by His turning round
and casting loving glances at them) they paused (awhile) awaiting the Lord's message in
reply to theirs (which had evidently been sent by them through some special messen-
ger).(34) Observing them suffering agony as aforesaid at His departure, Sri Krsna (the
foremost of the Yadus) comforted them with messages full of love, sent through a
messenger, saying "I shall come (back)!" (35) As long as the flag (of Sri Krsna's chariot) was
visible and so long as the dust raised by the chariot continued to be seen, the Gopis—who
had sent their mind after the Lord—were seen (standing) like so many painted figures. (36)
Hopeless of Govinda’s retum, they (all) retraced their steps and, rid of grief (by His loving
assurances) passed their days and nights celebrating in songs the pastimes of their beloved

Lord. (37)
Soa रामाक्रूरयुतो Far वायुवेगेन कालिन्दीमघनाशिनीम् । ३८॥
तत्रोपस्पृश्य पानीयं de मृष्टं मणिप्रभम्। वृक्षषण्डमुपव्रज्य सरामो रथमाविशत् । ३९॥
अक्रूरस्तावुपामन्त्य fee च रथोपरि। ene gare स्नानं विधिवदाचरत् ।॥४०॥
निमज्ज्य तस्मिन् सलिले जपन् ब्रह्म सनातनम् । तावेव SHA रामकृष्णौ समन्वितौ se |
at went कथमिह सुतावानकदुन्दुभे: | तर्हि स्वित् स्वन्दने न स्त इत्युन्मज्ज्य व्यचष्ट स: 1821
