500 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 88

Ferrer anennerereennennennnreeentensenneeensrerenersennnerecennennenntersennneanenee

The glorious Lord said ; Him on whom | shower My grace | gradually deprive of wealth.
His own people thereupon forsake him when he is (thus) reduced to penury and stricken with
sorrow. (8) When, striving (once more) with intent to acquire wealth, he finds all his attempts
abortive (through my grace) and, getting disappointed, makes friends with My devotees, that
is the time | show My (special) grace to him, whereby he attains (oneness with) that supreme
infinite Brahma which is (very) subtle (and therefore difficult to comprehend) and consists of
pure consciousness and Truth. That is why people turn their back on Me as one very difficult
to please and (proceed to) worship other deities. (9-10)Elated through the royal fortune
obtained (through such worship) from gods who are quickly propitiated, they get intoxicated
(with pride) and go astray. Forgetting the very gods that conferred boons on them, they

neglect them. (11)
STS उवाच
शापप्रसादयोरीशा ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवादय: । सद्य:श्ञापप्रसादोऽङ्ग शिवो ब्रह्मा न चाच्युत: 1221
अत्र चोदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम्।वृकासुराय fates at दत्त्वाऽऽपसङ्कटम् ।१३॥
वृको नामासुर: पुत्र: शकुने: पथि नारदम्। दृष्टाऽशुतोषं पप्रच्छ देवेषु त्रिषु दुर्मति: । १४॥
स ome देवं गिरिशमुपाधावाशु सिद्ध्यसि । योऽल्पाभ्यां गुणदोषाभ्यामाशु तुष्यति कुप्यति ।१५॥
दद्मास्यबाणयोस्तुष्ट: स्तुवतोर्वन्दिनोरिव । ऐश्चर्यमतुलं दत्त्वा aa आप सुसङ्कटम् । १६॥

Sri Suka continued : Dear Pariksit! Brahma, Visnu, Siva and the other gods have the
power to curse as well as to bless. (Of these again,) Lord Siva as well as Brahma (get
propitiated and angry soon and) are (therefore) very prompt in blessing as well as in cursing,
(but) not so Visnu. (12) In order to illustrate this truth, the wise relate an ancient anecdote
showing how by conferring a boon on the demon Vrka Lord Siva (who has His abode on
Mount Kailasa) got into trouble. (13) (Pariksit!) meeting (the celestial sage) Narada on the
way, this evil-minded demon, Vrka by name, son of Sakuni, inquired (of him) which of the
three gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) was quick to propitiate. (14) The sage replied, " Betake
yourself to Lord Siva. You will (thereby) gain your object very soon; He it is who is soon
Pleased with a small measure of merit and gets angry equally quickly through a slight
offence. (15) pleased with Ravana (the ten-headed monster) and Bana (the demon), who
(simply) glorified Him like bards, He conferred (on them) immense wealth and power, and
courted serious trouble thereby (in that Ravana uprooted His very home, Mount Kailasa,
while Bana secured from Him a boon that He should ever guard his city)." (16)

इत्यादिष्टस्तमसुर उपाधावत् स्वगात्रत: | केदार आत्मक्रव्येण जुह्वानोऽग्निमुखं हरम् । १७॥
देवोपलब्धिमप्राप्य निर्वॆदात् सप्तमेऽहनि । शिरोऽवृश्चत् स्वधितिना तत्तीर्थक्लिन्नमूर्धजम् । १८॥
तदा महाकारुणिक: स धूर्जटिर्यथा aq चाग्निरिवोत्थितोऽनलात् । ।
निगृह्य eat भुजयोर्न्यवारयत् तत्स्पर्शनाद् भूय उपस्कृताकृति: ।१९॥
तमाह agen वृणीष्र मे यथाभिकामं वितरामि a ami
प्रीयेय तोयेन yu प्रपद्यतामहो त्वयाऽऽत्पा «yada वृथा 1201
देवं स वव्रे पापीयान् at भूतभयावहम्। यस्य यस्य करं शीष्णि धास्ये स म्रियतामिति । २१॥
तच्छुत्वा भगवान् रुद्रो दुर्मना इव भारत। ओमिति प्रहसंस्तस्मै ददेऽहेरमृतं यथा । २२।
Instructed thus (by Narada), the demon worshipped Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the
universe), propitiating Him by means of (oblations of) his own flesh out of his body through

the mouth of fire at the sacred spot of)Kedara (a summit of the Himalayas). (17) Unable to
gain the sight of the Lord (even after worshipping Him in this way for six days) he proceeded
