Dis. 52] BOOK TEN 333

I eet NESTE NT ESTEE TES rE ne EY EEN EES EEE ee EY Seve yoNrs eee tear nce aevoar sewer

राजाऽऽसीद् भीष्मको नाम विदर्भाधिपतिर्महान् | तस्य पञ्चाभवन् पुत्रा: कन्यैका च वरानना । २१
रुक्म्यग्रजो Ba रुक्मबाहुरनन्तर: | रुक्मकेशो रुक्ममाली रुक्मिण्येषां स्वसा सती । २२।

सोपश्रुत्य मुकुन्दस्य रूपवीर्यगुणश्रिय: । गृहागतैर्गीयमानास्तं मेने weet पतिम् ।२३॥

तां बुद्धिलक्षणौदार्यसूपशीलगुणाश्रयाम् । कृष्णश्च सदृशीं भार्यां समुद्दोढुं मनो दधे ।२४॥
बन्धूनामिच्छतां a कृष्णाय भगिनीं नृप । ततो fart perks रुक्मी चैद्यममन्यत ।२५॥

Sri Suka continued : There was a great king, Bhigmaka by name, (who was) the
suzerain ford of Vidarbha (which is generally identified with the modern Berar). Five sons
and one daughter of charming countenance were born to him. (21) The eldest (of them)
was Rukmi, Rukmaratha the next, and then followed (in order of sequence) Rukmabahu,
Rukmakega and Rukmamali. Rukmini was (the name of) their virtuous sister. (22) Having
closely heard about the comeliness, valour, excellences and affluence of Sri Krsna (the
Bestower of Liberation) as being celebrated by visitors to her house, she began to look
upon Him as her befitting husband. (23) Sri Krsna too made up His mind to marry her in
an appropriate manner, knowing her (from similar sources) to be an embodiment of
intelligence, (auspicious) bodily characteristics, generosity, physical charm, amiability and
other virtues and (therefore) a worthy consort. (24) Rukmi (the eldest prince), who hated
Sri Krsna, proposed Sigupala (the ruler of Cedi), deterring his relations (parents and
brothers)—who intended to give away Rukmini (his sister) to Sti Krsna, 0 protector of
men—from that course. (25)

तदवेत्यासितापाङ्खी वैदर्भी दुर्मना भृशम्।विचिन्त्याप्तं द्विजं कञ्चित्कृष्णाय feo द्रुतम् IRE

द्वारको स समभ्येत्य oder: प्रवेशित: auger पुरुषमासीनं काञ्चनासने । २७

दृद्वां ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्तमवरुह्य निजासनात् । उपवेर्यार्हयाञ्चक्रे यथाऽऽत्मानं दिवौकस: ।२८।

a भुक्तवन्तं विश्रान्तमुपगम्य सतां गति: । पाणिनाभिमृशान् पादावव्यग्रस्तमपृच्छत । २९1

ah द्विजवरश्रेष्ठ धर्मस्ते वृद्धसम्मत: । वर्तते alee संतुष्टमनस: सदा ।३०॥

संतुष्टो a ada ब्राह्मणो येन केनचित्। अहीयमान: स्वाद्धर्मात्स ह्यस्याखिलकामधुक् । ३१1

असन्तुष्टोऽसकृत्लोकानाप्नोत्यपि सुरेश्वर: | अकिञ्चनोऽपि संतुष्ठ: aa सर्वाङ्गविज्वर: 1321

fa, स्वलाभसंतुष्टान् साधून् भूतसुहृत्तमान्। निरहङ्कारिण: ara नमस्ये शिरसासकृत् 133 1

alae व: Hae व्रह्मन् राजतो यस्य हि प्रजा: । सुखं वसन्ति विषये पाल्यमाना: स मे प्रिय: ।३४॥

चतस्त्वमागतो दुर्गं निस्तीर्येह यदिच्छया । ad नो ब्रूह्मगुह्यं चेत् किं कार्यं करवाम ते । ३५1

एवं wot mem: परमेष्ठिना। लीलागृहीतदेहेन तस्मै सर्वमवर्णयत् ।३६॥
Greatly troubled in mind to learn this and pondering (awhile), the beautiful Rukmini (the
princess of Vidarbha) speedily despatched a trusted Brahmana to bring Sri Krsna (to her
father's capital). (26) Having duly reached Dwaraka, and having been ushered (into the
Lord’s presence) by the porters, he beheld Sri Krsna (the most ancient Person) seated on
athrone of gold. (27) Seeing him (from a distance), Sri Krsna ( a devotee of the Brahmanas,
though Himself adored by all) got down from His throne and, having seated him (there),
honoured him in the same way as the gods (lit.,the denizens of heaven) honoured Him
(whenever He went to their abode). (28) Approaching him, when he had taken his meal and
rested (awhile), and gently kneading his feet with His hand Sri Krsna (the Goal of the
righteous) coolly inquired of him (as follows):—(29) “I hope, O jewel among the foremost of

Brahmanas, your religious observances, approved by the elders, are going on without much
difficulty, and | hope your mind is ever complacent. (30) When a Brahmana remains
