706 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

SABER AA TA TL RAR EAA AAT ENTE SEED RETR ARR EAREEE EEE AREA ERE ERA EHH

(thus) the (whole) universe, he was thrown out of the belly of the babe through its breath and
fell back, as is well-known, into the sea of deluge. (30) Perceiving there (once more) the
banyan tree growing on an elevation of earth and the babe too lying in a hollow leaf, and
gazed at (by the babe) with a sidelong glance accompanied by a smile full of the nectar of
love, the sage, who was much too afflicted, proceeded to embrace the babe—who was no
other than Lord Visnu, and had (already) entered his heart through (the door of) his eyes and
taken His seat there. (31-32) That very moment the babe—who was the almighty Lord
Himself, the Master of Yoga, Who dwells in the hearts of all—suddenly disappeared, andthe
effort of the sage (to hug the babe) met the same fate as the undertaking of an unlucky
person. (33) Following the Lord, O Brahmana sage | the banyan tree, the (deluge) water and
the dissolution of the universe (also) disappeared in an instant from the sight of the sage, who
stood in his hermitage as before. (34)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled “Markandeya witnesses
(the Lord's) Maya,” in Book Twelve of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PIERRE ors

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:

Discourse X

Lord Siva confers a boon on Markandeya

सूत उवाच
स एवमनुभूयेदे नारायणविनिर्मितम्। वैभवं योगमायायास्तमेव mei ययौ । १ |
Sita began again ; Realizing in this way the aforesaid glory of Yogamaya (creative

energy) displayed by Lord Narayana, the sage Markandeya sought Him alone for protection
(in the following words). (1)

मार्कण्डेय उवाच
प्रपन्नोऽस्म्यङ्ध्रिमूलं a प्रपन्नाभयदं हरे। यन्माययापि विबुधा मुह्यन्ति ज्ञानकाशया ! २ ।

Markandeya submitted ; | have resorted to the soles of Your feet, which grant
security to those who seek them (for protection), O Hari ! under the influence of whose
Maya (deluding potency), which assumes the (false) appearance of enlightenment, even
the learned fall a prey to delusion (in the shape of egotism, mistaking themselves to be
wise). (2)

सूत उवाच
aad निभृतात्मानं वृषेण दिवि पर्यटन्। रुद्राण्या भगवान् रुद्रो geet स्वगणैर्वृत: | ३ ।
ai waft वीक्ष्य faite समभाषत । ut भगवन् विप्रं निभृतात्मेन्द्वियाशयम् x |
निभृतोदझषव्रातं वातापाये यथार्णवम्। कुर्वस्यतपस:साक्षात्संसिद्धिंसिद्धिदो भवान् । ५ ।

Sita continued ; While journeying through the skies on (the back of) His bull with His

Spouse (Goddess Uma), accompanied by His attendants, Lord Rudra (the god of destruction)
saw the sage with his mind thus composed and collected. (3) Perceiving the sage in that
