242 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33

reflections (seen through a set of mirrors). (17) Their senses overwhelmed with excessive joy
caused by contact with His (Divine) person and their garlands and ornaments loosened, the
women of Vraja were not able to adjust as before thcir (unsettled) locks, scarf or (even) their
brassiere, O jewel of the Kurus. (18) Smitten with love to witness the amorous sportof SriKrsna,
the celestial ladies (too) fainted and the moon-god alongwith his retinue (viz., the twenty-seven
Naksatras or lunar mansions) felt amazed (with the result that his progress in the heavens was
arrested alongwith that of the other planets andthe night extended to an inordinate length). (19)
Sportfully revealing Himself in as many forms as there were cowherd women, the
aforesaid Lord delightfully speht His time with (each of) them (individually in different forms),
though revelling in His own Self. (20) With His most blissful hand, O dear Pariksit, the
compassionate Lord lovingly wiped the faces of those girls, fatigued (as they were) by over-
{exertion in) dancing. (21) Offering worship to the Supreme Person with the splendour of their
cheeks, heightened by the lustre of their brilliant gold ear-rings and curly locks, as well as with
their nectar-lixe smiles and glances and enraptured by the (thrilling) touch of His (blessed)
nails, the Gopis celebrated in song His purifying exploits. (22) Accompanied by them and
followed by black bees, humming like the leaders of Gandharvas and attracted by His garland
squeezed by the embraces of the Gopis and tinged with the saffron paint on their bosom, the
fatigued Lord—who had transgressed all limits (imposed by worldly usage and Vedic
injunctions)—entered the water (of the Yamuna) in order to get over His fatique, (even) as the
leader of (a herd of) elephants would do in the company of she-elephants after having broken
the dams. {23) Profusely sprinkled all over from every side by the young women—who were
heartily laughing—in the water and affectionately regarded by them, O dear Pariksit, and being
glorified by the gods (borne in their aerial cars and) showering flowers (on Him), the Lord
Himself sported in their midst like a leader of elephants, though revelling in His own Self. (24)
Surrounded by black bees and the bevies of young women, the Lord then rambled in a grove
on the bank of the Yamuna, served on all sides by a breeze wafting the fragrance of flowers
(both) on land and in water, (even) like a tusker shedding temporal fluid and accompanied by
she-elephants. (25) The aforesaid Lord of unfailing desire, to whom those bevies of delicate
women were (so) fondly attached and who (voluntarily) exhibited in Himself the (various)
amorous gestures, thus enjoyed all those nights” illumined with the rays of the full moon and
embodying all the charms peculiar to the autumn season and depicted in poetical works. (26)

ति

राजोवाच
संस्थापनाय धर्मस्य प्रशमायेतरस्य च adit हि amare जगदीश्वर: । २७॥
स wd we वक्ता कर्ताभिरक्षिता। प्रतीपमाचरद् owe परदाराभिमर्छषनम् । २८॥
आप्तकामो यदुपति: कृतवान् a जुगुप्सितम्। किमभिप्राय wi a: det छिन्धि सुव्रत ize
The king submitted : It was in fact for establishing Dharma (righteousness) on a sound
footing as well as for the suppression of that which is other than Dharma (viz.. Adharma or
unrighteousness) that Lord Sri Krsna. (the Ruler of the universe) descended (in the world of
matter) alongwith His part manifestation (Balarama). (27) How (then) did He, the Promulgator,
Institutor and Conservator of ethical standards, commit a transgression in the shape of
embracing others' wives, O holy one ? (28) With what intention indeed did that Lord of the
Yadus, who had all His desires fulfilled, perpetrate a repelling act ? (Pray,) resolve this doubt
of ours, O sage of sacred vows ! (29)

धर्मव्यतिक्रमो ge geri च साहसम्। तेजीयसां न दोषाय ag: सर्वभुजो यथा i301

* thas already been indicated in verse 19 above that the night on which the Lord enacted His celebrated Rasa-Play
combined numbertess nights. by divine will. although to the Gopis tn their ecstasy of delignt they appeared as one single night.
