dis. 51] BOOK TEN 329

FEN EEE EES CEE OT SE ETE E LEER ETRE SY ee K yee RETESET Teeter

Mucukunda prayed : Deluded by Your Maya (enchanting potency) and blind to the
(highest) Reality (viz., Yourself), O Lord, this creature (man)—appearing (now) as male and
(now as) female—does not worship You, but remains attached to the home, which is a
(prolific) source of misery (alone), in search of happiness, of which (however) it is (ever)
deprived. (46) Having somehow (by grace of God) secured without (any) effort birth—which
is (So) difficult to attain—in this land (of Bharatavarsa) as a human being sound of body and
mind (and therefore fit for devotions), O sinless Lord, man does not take refuge in Your lotus-
feei, his mind being set on the pleasures of sense (which are unreal), and remains sunk in
household life even like a beast fallen into a well overgrown with grass (and is unable to get
out of it). (47) (All) this life of mine, O invincible Lord, has slipped in vain in endless anxiety,
a ruler of the earth as | was with my pride puffed up by a royal fortune, viewing this mortal
frame as my own self and remaining attached to children, wives, treasury and lands. (48)
With the feeling about this body—which is as much apart from me as a jar or a wall—being
my own self anda ruler of men, deeply rooted (in my mind), nay, traversing the earth in all
directions, surrounded by generals commanding regiments of chariots, elephants, horses
and foot-soldiers, and forgetting You (the Time-Spirit), | had grown very haughty. (49) Alert
as the serpent that grabs a rat, licking the ends of its lips through hunger, You (appearing)
as Death suddenly overtake the embodied soul that is utterly forgetful (of You), engrossed
asitis in the thoughtofits (worldly) projects, and not only hankers after the pleasures of sense
(even though its aspirations are thwarted at every step) but finds its thirst (for enjoyment)
immensely aggravated (even as its aspirations are realized). (50) The same body which was
formerly—while moving about in chariots adorned with gold ornaments or on (the back of)
young elephants—bore the title of a ruler of men, (eventually) passes by the name of
excrement (if left exposed and devoured by dogs, jackals or vultures and crows etc.) of
worms (if interred) and of ashes (if cremated) when seized by You disguised as death, which
is (so) hard to escape. (51) Having fully conquered all the (four) quarters, with all possibility
of (a future) conflict precluded, and occupying a high seat (the exalted throne of a universal
monarch) and hailed by monarchs that were (once) his equals, the man, O Lord, is led (hither
and thither) as a toy-deer of young women in (the precincts of) the home, which offers (no
other charm than) sexual pleasures. (52) Devoted heart and soul to austerities with all
enjoyments ceased, and making gifts in the hope of (securing) such enjoyments (hereafter),
he performs (virtuous) actions (in his present life) in order that he may be reborn as Indra (or
as a universal monarch even in the life to come). He (however) whose thirst (for enjoyment)
is (thus) fully developed is never able to enjoy (any) happiness (whatsoever). (53) When the
end of (the cycle of) birth and death in the case ofa soul undergoing transmigration is in sight,
then (alone) his meeting with some saint takes place, O immortal Lord ! (And) when there
is fellowship with a saint, then alone is engendered (a feeling of) devotion to You, the Refuge
of saints and the Ruler of the high and the low. (54) | conclude that a (unique) favour has been
done to me by You, O Lord, in that the shackles of sovereignty have fallen off my feet without
(any) effort (on my part)—a consummation which is devoutly sought for by wise kings ruling
over the entire globe and intending to retire into the woods with a vow to live (all) alone. (55)
! do not covet any boon other than service to Your (sacred) feet—which is the highest
blessing worth coveting in the eyes of those who have nothing to call their own, O almighty
Lord ! For, having propitiated You, the Bestower of Liberation, O Hari, what wise man would
ask (of You) a boon which is (only) calculated to bind the soul (further) ? (56) Therefore,
rejecting, O Lord, all blessings associated with the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas
(such as religious merit, worldly prosperity and the extermination of foes), । run (for
protection) to You, the Supreme Person, who are pure consciousness free from (the taint of)
