Dis. 33] BOOK THREE 285

RERHMMLACLH LAR AAA ETERELELER ANE CRER eRe Hee eee eH eh ee a eee eee ee

the world) the path leading to Self-Realization.(5) By occasionally hearing and chanting Your
names, bowing to You or even remembering You, a pariah (one who feeds on the flesh of
dogs) becomes worthy of adoration in this very life as a Brahmana who has performed a
Soma-sacrifice (a sacrifice which brings great sanctity and extraordinary religious merit to
the sacrificer)! There could be no doubt, then, about.one’s attaining the object of life by Your
sight. (6) Oh, how wonderful that even a pariah (who cooks the flesh of dogs) becomes highly
venerable only because he has Your name on the tip of his tongue! Nay, they who utter Your
name have (thereby or in their previous life) practised austere penance, poured oblations
into the sacred fire, bathed (in sacred waters), conducted themselves well, and even recited
the Vedas. (7) In the form of Kapila (my son) You are no other than that Supreme Reality,
the Highest Person, who could be rightly conceived only in a mind that has been turned
inward, and who brings to an end the stream of the three Gunas (in the shape of
transmigration) by His own effulgence. You are Lord Visnu Himself, the source of the Vedas.

| bow to You.(8) ॥
WAY उवाच
ged भगवानेवं कपिलाख्य: पर: पुमान्। वाचा विक्लव्रयेत्याह मातरं मातृवत्सल: । ९ |

Maitreya went on : Thus praised (by Devahiti), the Supreme Person bearing the name
of Lord Kapila, who was full of filial affection, spoke to His mother in unfaltering accents. (9)

कपिळ उवाच
मार्गेणानेन मातस्ते सुसेव्येनोदितेन मे।आस्थितेन परां काष्ठामचिरादवरोत्स्यसि ।१०॥
serra मह्यं जुष्टं यद्द्रह्मयवादिभि: । येन मामभवं ae मृत्युमृच्छन्त्यतद्विद: ।११॥

Lord Kapila said : By following the easy path pointed out by Me, O mother, you will attain
before long to the supreme goal (in the shape of final beatitude). (10) Have faith in this
doctrine of Mine, which has been followed even by the exponents of Veda, so that you may
attain to My birthless state. Those who are ignorant of this go through the process of (birth
and) death (again and again). (11) ह

HAY उवाच

sft प्रदर्श्य भगवान् सतीं तामात्मनो गतिम्। स्वमात्रा ब्रह्मवादिन्या कपिलोऽनुमतो ययौ 1921
सा चापि तनयोक्तेन योगादेशेन योगयुक् । तस्मिन्नाश्रम ands सरस्वत्या: समाहिता 123
अभीक्ष्णावगाहकपिञान् जटिलान् कुटिलालकान्। आत्मानं चोग्रतपसा बिभ्रती चीरिणं कृशम् ।१४॥
प्रजापते: कर्दमस्य तपोचोगविजृम्भितम् । स्वगार्हस्थ्यमनौपम्यं प्रार्थ्य वैमानिकैरपि eu!
पय:फेननिभा: Wan दान्ता रुक्मपरिच्छ्दा: | आसनानि च हैमानि सुस्पर्शास्तरणानि wee!
स्वच्छस्फटिककुड्येषु महामारकतेषु च।रत्नत्रदीपा आभान्ति ललनारत्नसंयुता: । १७॥
गृहोद्यानं कुसुमितॆ रम्यं बह्वमरद्गुमै: । कूजद्विहङ्गमिथुनं गायन्मत्तमधुव्रतम् | १८।
यत्र प्रविष्टमात्मानं विब्रुधानुचरा जगु:। वाप्यामुत्पलगन्धिन्यां कर्दमेनोपलालितम् ee
हित्वा तदीप्सिततममप्याखण्डलयोषिताम्। किञ्चिच्चकार वद्नं पुत्रविर्लेषणातुरा 1201

Maitreya continued ; Having thus shown to His mother the noble way to Self-
Realization, and permitted by her,who now declared that all was Brahma, Lord Kapila went
His way.(12) She too applied herself to the practice of Yoga, according to the process of
meditation taught by her son, in that hermitage, which stood like a diadem of flowers on (the
head of) the Saraswati, and attained peace of mind.(13) The curly locks she wore on her
head turned brown on account of ablutions performed thrice a day, and became matted;
while her body, which was clad in rags, grew emaciated as a result of severe penance.(14)
