332 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 50

SERS STED IIT fr tet aire tion eran se win nnn ee tririnire gira tnine eerie secre matter eit nart

dominions). (35)
मुकुन्दोऽप्यक्षतबलो निस्तीर्णारिबलार्णव: । विकीर्यमाण: कुसुमैस्रिदशैरनुमोदित: । ३६1
भाथुरैरुपसङ्गम्य विज्वरैर्मुदितात्मभि: । उपगीयमानविजय: सूतमागधघवन्दिभि: । ३७॥
शङ्खदुन्दुभयो नेदुर्भेरीतूर्याण्यनेकरा: । वीणावेणुमृदङ्गानि पुरं प्रविद्ञति प्रभौ isc
सिक्तमार्गां हष्टजनां पताकाभिस्तङ्कृताम्। Pest ब्रह्मघोषेण कौतुकाबद्धतोरणाम् ।३९॥
निचीयमानो नारीभिर्माल्यदध्य क्षताङ्कुरै:।निरीक्ष्यपत्था.॰ wae प्रीत्युतक्कलितलोचनै: 1४०॥
arated वित्तमनन्तं वीरभूषणम्। वदुराजाय तत् सर्वमाहतं प्रादिशत्प्रभु: 1४१1
Meeting the citizens of Mathura, that had now been rid of (all) agony, and felt delighted
at heart (and had now come out to greet and felicitate their Saviours), Lord Sri Krsna (the
Bestower of Liberation) too returned—Sri Krsna, whose army remained (completely)
unscathed and who was applauded by the gods and was (also) being covered with flowers
in that He had crossed without any effort the ocean of the enemy's forces, nay, whose victory
was being celebrated by Sutas (heralds), Magadhas (ba rds) and Vandis (panegyrists). (36-37)
Conchs and drums, kettledrums and clarionets as well as lutes, flutes and clay tomtoms
sounded (of themselves) while the Lord was entering the city, whose road had been sprinkled
(with water), (nay) which was full of merry men, was decorated with flags and resonant
with the chanting of Veda and which had ornamental arches erected all round by way of
festivity. (38-39) Being strewn by women with flowers, curds unbroken grains of rice and
sprouts, and lovingly regarded with eyes dilated through joy, the Lord presented to King
Ugrasena (the ruler of the Yadus) all the untold wealth (found) lying on thé field of battle and
the jewellery of (killed) warriors, that had been brought by Him. (40-41)

एवं सप्तदशकृत्वस्तावत्यक्षौहिणीबल: । युयुधे मागधघो राजा यदुभि: कृष्णपालितै: 1x21
awe सर्वं qua: कृष्णतेजसा । हतेषु ai त्यक्तोऽयादरिभिर्नृप: ।॥४३॥
अष्टादशमसंग्राम आगामिनि तदन्तरा। नारदप्रेषितो वीरो यवन: प्रत्यदृश्यत sel
रुरोध मथुरामेत्य त्निसृभिर्कोच्छकोटिभि:।नृलोकेचाप्नतिद्वद्धोबृष्णौद्दुप्त्यग्ऽऽत्मप्तम्मित्तम्यिंपा

Followed (each time) by an army consisting of the same number of (viz., twenty-three)
Aksauhinis, King Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) fought in this way (as many as)
Seventeen times with the Yadus, who were protected by Sri Krsna (and were therefore
invincible). (42) Endowed (however) with the (inexhaustible and unequalled) might of डा
Krsna, the Vrsnis annihilated his entire force. Let off by the Yadus (his enemies) onhis troops
having been killed, the monarch withdrew (to his capital). (43) While the eighteenth
encounter was yet to come, Kalayavana (a Yavana hero), despatched by the sage Narada,
appeared (on the scene) during the interval. (44) Having heard (from the mouth of Narada,*
of whom he had enquired the names of foremost warriors on the earth's surface) of the Yadus
as being his equals (in prowess), Kalayavana, who had no rival among men, came and
besieged Mathura with thirty millions of Mlecchas (non-Aryans or barbarians). (45)

तं दृष्टाचिन्तयत् कृष्ण: सङ्कुर्षणसहायवान्। अहो यदूनां वृजिनं प्राप्तं ह्युभयतो महत् ।४६॥
यवनोऽयँ निरुन्धेऽस्मानद्य तावन्महाबल: | मागधोऽप्यद्य वा श्वो वा परश्वो वाऽऽगमिष्यति । ४७1
आवयोर्बुध्यतोरस्य यद्यागन्ता जरासुत: । बन्धून् वधिष्यत्यथवा नेष्यते स्वपुरं बली ।४८॥
mere विधास्यामो दुर्गं द्विपददुर्गमम्।तत्र ज्ञातीन् समाधाय यवनं घातयामहे ।४९॥

* Vide Visnu-Purana V.xxiii. 6.
