758 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

EER ERR RR See RR EE EEE HE HO EOE EEE EERE TEEN AE EEL REE HER HH AAA ३ ३.३.३..७..३.५

अथ षष्ठोध्याय:

Discourse VI

Transportation of Mount Mandara (to serve as a churn-staff
for stirring the ocean of milk)
श्रीगुक उवाच

एवं स्तुत: सुरगणैर्भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: । तेषामाविरभूद् राजन्सहस्रार्कोदयद्युति: । १ ।

ata महसा सर्वे देवा: प्रतिहतेक्षणा: | aaa fea: क्षोणिमात्मानं च कुतो faqs २ ।

विरिञ्चो भगवान्दृष्टा सह शर्वेण at तनुम्। Sw मरकतश्यामां कञ्जगर्भारुणेक्षणाम् । ३ ।

तप्तहेमावदातेन लसत्कौशोयवाससा । प्रसन्नचाससर्वाङ्गीं सुमुखीं सुन्दरभ्रुवम् । ४ ।

महामणिकिरीटेन केचूराभ्यां च भूषिताम्। कर्णाभरणनिर्भातकपोलश्रीमुखाम्बुजाम् । ५ |

काञ्चीकलापवलयहारनूपुरशोभिताम् । कौस्तुभाभरणां लक्ष्मीं बिभ्रतीं वनमालिनीम् । ६ ।

सुदर्शनादिभिर॥ स्वास्रैर्मूर्तिमद्भिरुपासिताम्। qa देवप्रवर: aad: पुरुषं परम्।

सर्वामरगणै: साकं सर्वाङ्गैरवनिं गतॆ: । ७ |
Sri Suka resumed:Thus extolled by the hosts of gods, the almighty Lord Sti Hari

appeared before them, O king, with the effulgence of a thousand suns rising together. (1) All
the gods had their eyes dazzled by that very effulgence, so that they could not perceive
the sky, the quarters, the earth and even themselves; how (then) could they perceive the
Lord ? (2) The glorious Brahma (the creator) along with Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the
universe) beheld that very spotless form, dark green as the emerald, with Its eyes ruddy as
the interior of a lotus.(3) Clad in a shining silk piece, yellow as burning gold, It was graceful
and charming in every limb, had a lovely countenance and beautiful eyebrows.(4) It was
adored with a crown set with precious gems and a pair of armlets (one on each arm); and
Its cheeks, illumined by (brilliant) ear-rings, added to the charm of Its lotus-like face. (5) Itwas
(also) decked with a girdle, a pair of wristlets, a (pearl) necklace and a pair of anklets, and
was (further) adorned with the (famous) Kaustubha gem and a wreath of sylvan flowers
(about Its neck). (Nay,) It bore (on Its bosom) Goddess Laksmi (in the form of a golden streak)
and was waited upon by His own weapons, Sudarsana and others, endowed with a personal
form. Accompanied by Lord Siva and all the hosts of gods, who fell prostrate with all (their)
limbs on the ground, Brahma (the foremost of the gods) hymned the supreme Person (as
follows).(6-7)

योगेन धात: ae नस्रिलोकान् पड्याम्यमुष्मिन् नु ह विश्वमूर्तौ । ९ ।
we आसीत् त्वयि मध्य आसीत् त्वय्यन्तं आसीदिदमात्मतन्त्रे ।
त्वमादिरन्तो जगतोऽस्य मध्यं घटस्य FR पर: परस्मात् ।१०॥
a माययाऽत्माश्रयया स्वयेदं निर्माय fad तदनुप्रविष्ट: |
पश्यन्ति युक्ता मनसा मनीषिणो गुणव्यवायेऽप्यगुणं विपश्चित: ।११॥
