Dis. 5] BOOK SIX 577

PREEEEEAERA LEAR AAR AREA EEE EEE ERRERELGERAEERERR EH hi iciirirneorrrerernnenhhkin ik
ES EEE AERA REE RE गी

path ofa mendicant. (36) You have ruined their interests, 0 sinful one, in both the worlds
(here as well as hereafter), while they had not yet been exonerated from their threefolc*
obligations, nor had they pondered over the futility of (worldly) activities (and were thus
unqualified" for taking to the path of renunciation). (37) Mercilessly unsettling in this way the
mind of youngsters (intent on promoting the righteous cause of creation), you have tarnished
the fair name of the Lord, and (yet) you shamelessly move in the midst (count as one) of His
attendants | (38) Barring you—who have trampled (our) love and actually shown enmity
(even) to us,-who are not enemies—the votaries of the Lord are undoubtedly ever anxious
to shower their grace on (all) living beings. (39) Vairagya (freedom from attachment to the
world) cannot be engenderedin the mind of the peoplein this way by you, who have assumed
the guise of an ascetic without true wisdom, even though you regard (Vairagya as conducive
to quietism and) quietism as a means of cutting asunder the bonds of attachment. (40) (For)
a man cannot realize the bitterness (painful consequences) of the pleasures of sense
without tasting them. (Therefore) he whose mind has been unsettled by others would not feel
disgusted with the world so fullyas he might of his own accord (through such realization).(41)
We (quietly) put up with the wrong which you did to us, householders, vowed to the
performance of rituals and intent on achieving heavenly bliss, even though the wrong was
such as could not be easily forgotten. (42) (Yet) inasmuch as you have cone an offence
against us for a second time. O fool responsible for breaking the continuity of our race,
therefore, you will have no halt as you wander through the spheres. (43)
श्रीरुक उवाच
प्रतिजग्राह तद्बाढं नारद: साधुसम्मत: । एतावान् साधुवादो हि तितिक्षेतेश्वर: स्वयम् ।४४॥

Sri Suka went on : The sage Narada, who was esteemed (even) by the virtuous,

accepted the curse (pronounced by Daksa) with the words "Very well !" That he who is

himself powerful (enough to retaliate by uttering a counter-curse), should put up with
another's offence, this alone entitles a man to the title of a pious soul. (44)

Thus ends the fifth discourse, entitled "Narada subjected to an execration",
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharnsa-Samhita.

२१९ ३३२९ क
IIS ee

TT eS

" Every member of twice-bom classes is born, so declare the Vedas, with a debt to the Rsis, the manes and the gods.
Itis (1) by studying the Vedas with a vow of strict celibacy in the prime of his life, (2) by marrying and begetting children after
finishing his studies and (3) by performing sacrifices that he discharges these three debts :—

जायमानो वै ब्राह्मणस्तिभिर्ऋणवान् जायते ब्रह्मचर्येण ऋषिभ्यो यज्ञेन देवेभ्य: प्रजया पितृभ्य एष वा अनृणो य: पुत्री यज्वा ब्रह्मचारी वासि।

We read In the Manusmrmithat a member of the twice-bom classes should set his mind on Liberation only after he has
discharged the aforementioned threefold debt, and thathe who strives for Moksa without having discharged these three debts

falls in the scale of spiritual evolution ह ॥। वि
ऋणानि जानपाकृत्य मनो मोक्षे निबेशयत्।
अनपाकृत्य मोक्षं ४॥ सेवमानो व्रजत्यघ:॥
