३50 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [.Dis. 55

SERCO RESORT Int ter ht iin ton ihe tore eter er rt een rrinmntormn SRS UCTOTHETE Sener tri teiot wren te

dissimilarity (viz., the absence of Kaustubha and Srivatsa) that he was not $x Krsna, the
ladies went up to him overjoyed, yet greatly amazed to find him accompanied with an
excellent young lady. (29) Presently Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha)—the corners of
whose eyes were (naturally) dark (without the use of collyrium) and who was gifted with a
sweet tongue—recalled on that occasion (through similarity of features) her own lost son,
milk flowing from her breasts through (maternal) affection. (30) (She said to herself.) "Who
could this jewel among men with lotus-eyes possibly be? Again, whose son may he be or by
whom was he borne in her womb and who, in fact may be this young woman obtained by him
(through good-luck)? (31) My own son too—who was stolen away (by some evil spirit) from
the lying-in-chamber and has been missing (all these years)—must have attained an age
similar to this boy's and come to possess similar features, should he be living anywhere. (32)
But how could this boy acquire (such) similarity of form with the Lord bearing the Sarnga bow
in point of features, limbs, gait, voice, smiles and glances ? (33) Or he may undoubtedly be
the selfsame boy who was borne in my womb; (for) great is my affection for him and my left
arm is throbbing. (34)

एवं मीमांसमानायां demi देवकीसुत: । देवक्यानकदुन्दुभ्यामुत्तमरलोक आगमत् ।३५॥
विज्ञातार्थोऽपि भगवांस्तूष्णीमास जनार्दन: । नारदोऽकथयत् ad शम्बराहरणादिकम् 135 |
तच्छुत्वा महदाश्चर्य कृष्णान्त:पुरयोषित: | अभ्यनन्दन् बहूनव्दान् नष्टं मृतमिवागतम् । ३७1
देवकी वसुदेवश्च कृष्णरामौ तथा स्रिय: । दम्पती तौ परिष्रज्य रुक्मिणी च agen ।३८॥
नष्टं प्रद्युम्नमायातमाकर्ण्य द्वारकौकस: | tet मृत इवायातो बालो दिष्ट्येति हान्रुवन् ।३९॥
a a qe पितृसरूपनिजेशभावास्तन्मातरो यदभजन् रहरूढभावा: ।
fea न तत् खलु रमास्पदबिम्बबिम्बे कामे स्मरेऽक्षिविषये किमुतान्यनार्य: ।`४०॥

इति श्रीमद्धागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धं उत्तरार्धे अद्युम्नात्पत्तिनिरूपणं नाम पञ्चपञ्चादात्तमोऽध्वाय: । ५५1

While Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) was thus speculating, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son
of Devaki) of excellent renown made His appearance (there) alongwith (His parents) Devaki
and Vasudeva. (35) Although the (whole) truth was fully known to Him, Lord Sri Krsna (who
is petitioned by all men) remained quiet. The sage Narada (however) narrated (to them)
everything as to how the demon Sambara hadstolen away the boy (while he was yet ababe)
and so on. (36) Hearing of that great miracle (viz., the baby's escaping alive and unhurt from
the bowels of a fish and his subsequently killing a powertul demon} the ladies of Sri Krsna's
gynaeceum greeted with joy the boy who had been missing for many years (past) and had
returned (to life) as it were, though (once) dead. (37) Devaki and Vasudeva, Sri Krsna and
Balarama, as well as Rukmint and the other ladies were transported with joy to embrace the
(newly arrived) couple. (38) Hearing that Pradyumna had returned, though (long) lost, the
citizens of Dwaraka—-so the story goes—said (to one another), "Oh, the boy has by good-
luck come back (to life) as it were though (once) dead!" (39) Indeed itis no wonder that when
Pradyumna (Love incarnate)—whose very thought agitates one’s mind, nay, who was an
exact likeness of the personality of Sri Krsna (the Abode of Rama, the goddess of beauty and
good fortune)—came within sight, (even) his mothers, who often (mis-) took him for their own
Spouse due to his close resemblance with his Father, sought seclusion (out of modesty, love
being kindled in their heart). Much more did other women feel like that in his presence. (40)

Thus ends the fifty-fifth discourse entitled “The story of Pradyumna’s birth.” in the
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmmsa-Samhita.

न्न्न्
LODE ELS OID
