Dis. 6] BOOK SIX 581

SEEN nie ere bt Sie ft Sin eininin ine trinitrate int init a dee ie ai oiiiniieininiinire:
Aruna, Puloma, Vrsaparva and Ekacakra, Anutapana, Dhiimrakeéa, Virpaksa, Vipracitti

and Durjaya. (30-31) Namuci, it is said, married Suprabha, the daughter of Swarbhanu;

while the mighty Yayati,* son of Nahusa (a human king), wedded Sarmistha, the daughter
of Vrsaparva. (32) Now hear (the names) of the four daughters of Vai$wanara (another son

of Danu), who were (all) charming to look at, (viz.,) Upadanavi, Hayasira, Puloma and
Kalaka. (33) (Of these,) Hiranyaksat espoused Upadanavi: and Kratu, Hayasira, O Pariksit!

And urged by Brahma (the creator), the glorious Kasyapa (a lord of created beings) married
the other two daughters of Vaigwanara, (viz.,) Puloma and Kalaka. Of these (Puloma and
Kalaka), were born sixty thousand Danavas (great grandsons of Danu), (known as) the

Paulomas and Kalakeyas, who distinguished themselves in battle. When in heaven (ona

friendly visit), your father's father (Arjuna), O Pariksit, slew them (all) single-handed in order
to please Indra (the lord of paradise); inasmuch as they wrecked his sacrificial perform-

ances.(34—36) Vipracitti begot through (his wife) Sirnhika a hundred and one sons, the

eldest of whom was Rahu, who (along with his hundred brothers) attained (through divine

grace) to the position of a Graha (the deity presiding over a planet), the other hundred being

(called) the Ketis. (37)

अथात: श्रूयतां ae चोऽदितेरनुपूर्वरा: । यत्र नारायणो देव: स्वांशेनावतरद् विभु: 1301
विवस्वानर्यमा पूषा pre सविता भग:। धाता विधाता वरुणो मित्र: शक्र उरुक्रम: । ३९॥
विवस्वत: श्राद्धदेवं संज्ञासूयत वै मनुम्। मिथुनं च महाभागा यमं देवं यमीं तथा ।
सैव भूत्वाथ वडवा नासत्यौ सुषुवे भुवि ।४०॥
छाया Wart SY सावर्णि च मनुं तत: । कन्यां च तपतीं या वै ad संवरणं पतिम् ive!
अर्यम्णो मातृका पत्नी तयोश्चर्षणय: सुता: । चत्र वै मानुषी जातिर्ब्रह्मणा चोपकल्पिता ।४२॥
पूषानपत्य: पिष्टादो भग्नदन्तोऽभवत् yi योऽसौ cara afta जहास विवृतद्विज: ।४३॥
aga भार्या रचना नाम कन्यका । संनिवेशस्तयोर्जज्ञे विश्वरूपश्च वीर्यवान् ।४४॥
तं abe सुरगणा स्वस्त्रीयं द्विषतामपि । विमतेन परित्यक्ता गुरुणाऽऽङ्निरसेन यत् ।४५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां षष्ठस्कन्धे षष्ठोऽध्याय:।६।

Now from this point onward hear (from me) in order of sequence (an account) of the race
that proceeded from Aditi, in which the almighty Lord Narayana Himself appeared by
manifesting a part of His own Being (in the form of the divine Dwarf). (38) Vivaswan, Aryama,
Pusa, Twasta, Savita, Bhaga, Dhata, Vidhata, Varuna, Mitra, Sakra (Indra) and Vamana (who
took colossal strides after assuming a cosmic form)—these are the (twelve) sons of Aditi
(who preside over the sun one after another month by month). (39) The highly blessed
Samjfia, a wife of Vivaswan, brought forth Sraddhadeva, who rose to be the Manu (during
the present Manvantara), and a son and daughter, born as twins, (viz.,) the god Yama (the
god of punishment) and Yami (the deity presiding over the holy river Yamuna). Then
appearing as (assuming the form of) a mare on earth, the same (celestial) lady gave birth
to the twin born Aswinikumaras (the celestial physicians). (40) (His other wife) Chaya (who
was no other than a shadow of Sarhjfia) got through her husband (a couple of sons, named)
Sanaiscara (the deity presiding over the planet Saturn) and Savarni (another prospective)
Manu, as well as a daughter, Tapati (by name), who indeed chose king Sarnvarana for her
husband. (41) Aryama’s wife was Matrka and their sons were called the Carsanis (because
they were full of wisdom). It was after them (as endowed with a special aptitude for self-

* Vide Discourse xvili of Book VIII.
t The storfof Hiranyaksa has already been told at length in Discourses xvii-xix of Book III.
