Dis. 21] BOOK FIVE 525

BERBER RON EEE RE OIE REE FE eT FE RT EH SHE ROO I NO Se RE Nee RT or RR et
णत्तर्त्त

existence on that mountain of the city of Indra (the deity presiding over the eastern quarter),
named Devadhani, the city of Yama (the deity presiding over the southern quarter), called
Samyamani, the city of Varuna (the deity presiding over the western quarter), Nimlocani by
name, and the city of Soma (the moon-god, the deity presiding over the northern quarter),
known as Vibhavari, to the east, south, west and north respectively of Mount Meru. When the
sun makes its way into these cities (one after another) at particular periods (of the day), there
are on the four sides of Mount Meru sunrise, midday, sunset and midnight respectively—
which serve as occasions for activity and suspension of activity on the part of living beings.(7)
For those dwelling on the Meru the sun ever shines as at midday. And though (actually
moving in an easterly direction with its face turned towards the lunar mansions and) keeping
the Meru onits left, it appears to (move ina westerly direction and) keep the Meru on its right
(because of the movement in an opposite direction of the entire stellar sphere including the
sun, which is going from east to west, being pushed by the wind known as Pravaha, which
is always blowing with the Meru on its right). (8) It is a well-known fact that it sets (goes out
of sight) just on the opposite side of the point where it rises (comes to view) and it sends the
world to deep sleep (causes midnight) just opposite to the place where it torments people
(by its heat), so as to make them drip with perspiration. (Similarly) they who clearly see it
continually (from sunrise to sunset) no longer perceive it when it has gone to the other side
(That is to say, when the sun shines overhead on the opposite side, there is midnight on this
side). (9)
ज्योतिश्चक्रे समभ्युद्यन्ति सह वा निम्लोचन्ति। ११। एवं मुहूर्तेन चतुस्विंशल्लक्षयोजनान्यष्टशताधिकानि

When the sun proceeds from the city of Indra to that of Yama, it traverses, in the course
of fifteen Ghatikas (six hours), (a distance of) two and a quarter crore, twelve and a half lakh
and more (twenty-five thousand) Yojanas (i.e., two crore, thirty-seven lakh and seventy-five
thousand Yojanas all told or one-quarter of its total orbit). (10) In the same way (in the same
period) it travels from it (from the last-mentioned city, the city of Yama) to the city of Varuna,
and (thence) to the city of Soma and (then) back to the city of Indra (all of which are situated
at an equal distance from one another). So also other planets such as the moon alongwith
the lunar mansions rise as well as set together in the stellar sphere. (11) Thus covering (a

by it, and joining to the total width of these six Dwipas and the same number of oceans surrounding them half the width of
the seventh and largest Dwipa (Puskaradwipa) at the centre of which the mountain-belt called Manasottara is placed, the
figure of one crore. fifty-seven lakh and fiity thousand Yojanas is arrived. This represents the radius of the circle described
by the revolution of the sun's chanot on the top of the Manasottara mountain with Mount Meru, standing at the core of
- Jambudwipa, asits centre. The double of this number or 3 crore and fifteen lakh Yojanas represents the extent of its diameter.
According to the esiablished rules of geometry the extent of the circumference of a circle is 3 '/, times as muchas its diameter.
Multiplying the length of the diameter as calculated above by 3 '/, the figure comes tonine crore and ninety lakh Yojanas. This,
however, does not tally with the figure cited in the text, which is 39,00,000 less. A learned commentator, however, points out
that, really speaking, the distance from the centre of Mount Meru to the orb of Ihe sun itself should be reckoned as the radius
of the circle and this has been ascertained from other authoritative sources to be in the neighbourhood of one crore and fifty-
one lakh Yojanas only. Thus calculated, the diameter of the circle works out at the figure of three crore and two lakh Yojanas
approximately. And by multiplying this figure by 3 */_ the resutt arrived at exactly corresponds to the figure quoted in the text.
