Dis. 3] ` ‘BOOK FOUR™ ` 299':

RHeKKHSHH AH reek BRAKE EMERERERE DT EE inti t te st he tte eh ae a thee

पश्य प्रयान्तीरभवान्ययोषितोऽप्यलंकृता: कान्तसखा वरूथञ्: ।
यासां sate: शितिकण्ठ मण्डितं नभो विमानै: कलहंसपाण्डुभि: । १२॥
अनाहुता अप्यभियन्ति सौहृदे भर्तुर्गुरोर्देहकृतश्च केतनम्।१३॥
_त्वयाऽऽत्मनोऽर्धेऽहमद्भ्रचक्षुषा निरूपिता मानुगृहाण याचित: ।१४॥

Sati said: | hear a grand sacrificial festival has been set on foot at the residence of Your
father-in-law, the lord of created beings. Let us also move thither, if You so desire, O
Vamadeva; these heavenly beings are (all) going there. (8) Mysisters will surely attend it with
their husbands in their eagerness to see their kinsfolk. | too long to be there with You and
receive the presents that will be bestowed (on me by my parents). (9) There | hope to see
my own sisters, the esteemed of their spouses, as well as my mother's sisters and (above
all) my own mother, whose mind is so full of affection for me, for all of whom my heart has
been yearning for along time. And | shall also see, my blissful lord, the great sacrifice which
is being performed by eminent seers. (10) (Undoubtedly) this wonderful creation, consisting
of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and brought forth by Your own Maya, appears
in You. Nevertheless |, a pitiable woman, and ignorant of Your reality, long to see my native
place, O birthless Siva (the ultimate source of the universe). (11) Behold, my birthless lord,
other women (in no way connected with my parents), also richly adorned, going with their
consorts in large numbers. The sky looks charming with their moving aerial cars, white as
swans, 0 Lord with a dark spot in the throat (caused by swallowing a most deadly poison
in the interest of the world* ). (12) How can the (mind and) body of a daughter remain
unmoved, O Chief of the gods, on hearing of a festivity at the house of her parents? People
go to the house of their husband, preceptor, parents and other near and dear ones even
uninvited. (13) Therefore, compassionate as You are, be pleased to grant this desire of mine,
O immortal lord ! Though possessed of infinite wisdom, You have located me in the (left) half
of Your person (and accepted the appellation of Ardhanarigwara); (therefore) do me this
favour as entreated by me. (14)

एवं fife: प्रिययाभिभाषित: प्रत्यभ्यधत्त प्रहसन् सुहृत्मिय: ।
संस्मारितो मर्मभिद: कुवागिषून् यानाह को विश्वसृजां समक्षत: ।१५॥
The sage resumed: Thus importuned by His beloved spouse, Siva (the Lord of Kailasa),
whois so loving to His relations, was reminded of the shaft-like words of reproach that Daksa

had uttered in the presence of the other lords of created beings, and which were cutting to
the quick. He, therefore, laughed and made the following reply. (15)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
त्वयोदितं शोभनमेव ae sae अप्यभियन्ति बन्धुषु ।
ते यद्यनुत्पादितदोषदृष्टयो बलीयसानात्प्यमदेन मन्युना 1261

at हतायां भृतमानदुर्दृश: wen न usaf fe am भूयसाम् । १७॥

"Vide verses 40—43 of Discourse VII of Book Eight.

