Dis. 21;] BOOK THREE: 231

कक्तै वित् AE EEAHASESAESHAECEHE ESTEE E RHEE EEE पि AEE HEOCHAAA KOEHN HEHEAAEE AE

O holy Brahmana, the day after tomorrow and will give away his dark-eyed daughter—who has
attained the marriageable age, is possessed of anoble character and commendable virtues and
is on the look-out for a match—to you, who are (in everyway) worthy of her, O lord of created
beings. (26-27) Being just the type on which you have set your heart all these long years, that
princess, O holy sage, will soon be yours and will serve you to your heart's content. (28) She will
bring forth nine daughters out of the seed sown in her by you, and through the daughters sprung
from your loins sages (like Marici) will duly beget children. (29) And, with your heart cleansed by
properly carrying out My command and having resigned to Me the fruit of all your acts, you will
finally attain to Me. (80) Showing compassion to living beings (in your married life), you will attain
Self-Realization; and, giving assurance of safety to all (as a recluse), you will perceive your own
selfas well as the universe identified in Me and Myself in you. (31) Manifesting a part of My divine
Being through your wife Devahtti, along with your nine daughters, O great sage, | shall instruct
her in the system of philosophy (known by the name of Sankhya) that deals with the ultimate
principles or categories (such as Prakrti, Purusa, ISwara and so on). (32)

मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं तमनुभाष्याथं भगवान् प्रत्यगक्षज:। जगाम बिन्दुसरस: सरस्वत्या परिश्रितात् । ३३॥
निरीक्षतस्तस्य ययावरोषसिद्धेश्चराभिष्टुतसिद्धमार्ग: ।
आकर्णयन् पत्ररथेन्द्रपक्षैरुच्चारितं स्तोममुदीर्णसाम । ३४॥

Maitreya went on : Having thus spoken to him (the sage Kardama), the Lord, who
reveals Himself only when the senses are turned inward, departed (for His own Abode,
Vaikuntha) from (his hermitage on the strand of) the lake called Bindusarovara, which was
encircled by the river Saraswati. (33) While the sage stood looking on, the Lord left by the
path leading to Vaikuntha—a path which is extolled by all great Siddhas—listening to the
hymns forming the basis of the Samaveda and uttered by the wings” of Garuda (the lord of
the feathered kingdom). (34)

अथ सम्प्रस्थिते शुक्ले कर्दमो भगवानृषि: | आस्ते स्म बिन्दुसरसि तं कालं प्रतिपालयन् 1841
मनु: स्यन्दनमास्थाय जातकोम्भपरिच्छदम्। आरोप्य ai दुहितरं सभार्य: पर्यटन्महीम् । ३६॥
तस्मिन् सुधन्वन्नहनि भगवान् यत्समादिशत्। उपायादाश्रमपदं मुने: जान्तव्रतस्य AB
यस्मिन् भगवतो नेत्रान्न्यपतन्नश्रुबिन्दव: | कृपया सम्परीतस्य प्रपन्नेऽर्पितया भृशम् । ३८॥।
ae बिन्दुसरो नाम सरस्वत्या परिप्रुतम्। पुण्यं शिवामृतजलं महर्षिगणसेवितम् । ३९
पुण्यद्गुमलताजालै: क्काण्यंमृगद्बिज।सबर्तुफलपुप्याट्य वनराजिश्रियान्वितम् | So |
Tatars मत्तभ्रमरविभ्रमम् | मत्तबर्हिनटाटोपमाह्वयन्मत्तकोकिलम् ।`४१॥
कदम्बचम्पकाशोककरञ्जबकुलासनै: । कुन्दमन्दारकुटजैश्चूतपोतैरलङ्कृतम् ।४२॥
कारण्डव:र «= wae: कुररैर्जलकुक्कुटै: | सारसैश्चक्रवाकैश्च चकोरैर्बल्गु कूजितम् ।४३।
तथैव हरिणै: क्रोडै: श्वाविद्गवयकुञ्जरै: | गोपुच्छैर्हरिभिर्मर्वैर्नकुलैर्नाभिभिर्वृतम् ।`४४॥

Even after the departure of the Lord the worshipful sage Kardama stayed (in his hermitage)
on the strand of the Bindusarovara, awaiting the time (predicted by the Lord). (35) (On this
side), Swayambhuva Manu with his spouse (SatarGpa) mounted his goldplated chariot and,

* The Sruti says : `वृहद्रधन्तर पक्षौ` (Brhad and Rathantara, the two metrical divisions of Samaveda, form the two wings of
Garuda). Itis mentioned at more than one places in the Bhagavata itself that the hymns of the Samaveda proceed from the
wings of Garuda whenever he takes a flight.
