Dis. 3] BOOK TWELVE 679

RE ग क क OIE RETIRE TOR IORI EI OTE OO SUIT OE TO ४8 5१११ १ ४१

न रक्षिष्यन्ति मनुजा: स्थविरौ पितरावपि । पुत्रान् सर्वार्थकुशलान् ag: शिश्नोदरम्भरा: 1621
कलौ न राजञ्जगतां परं गुरुं  त्रिलोकनाथानतपादपङ्कजम्।
प्रायेण eal भगवन्तमच्युते यक्ष्यन्ति पाखण्डविभिन्नचेतस: 1x31
यन्नामधेयं म्रियमाण आतुर: पतन् स्खलन् वा विवशो yor पुमान्।
विमुक्तकर्मार्गल samt uff प्राप्नोति यक्ष्यन्ति न तं कलौ जना: resi
पुंसां कलिकृतान् दोषान् द्रव्यदेशात्मसम्भवान् । सर्वान् हरति चित्तस्थो भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम: ।४५॥
श्रुत: सङ्कीर्तितो ema: पूजितश्चादृतोऽपि वा । नृणां धुनोति भगवान् हत्स्थो जन्मायुताशुभम् ।४६॥
यथा हेम्नि fer बह्निर्दुर्वर्णं हन्ति धातुजम्। एवमात्मगतो विष्णुर्योगिनामशुभाहायम् ive!
Tee लभतेऽन्तरात्मा यथा ह्दिस्थे भगवत्यनन्ते ॥४८॥
तस्मात् सर्वात्मना राजन् हृदिस्थं कुरु केशवम् । म्रियमाणो ह्यवहितस्ततो यासि ai गतिम् ।४९।
म्रियमाणैरभिध्येयो भगवान् परमेश्वर: | आत्मभावं नयत्यङ्ग सर्वात्मा सर्वसंश्रय: 140!
कलेर्दोषनिधे राजन्नस्ति ह्येको महान् गुण: । कीर्तनादेव कृष्णस्य मुक्तसङ्ग: परं व्रजेत् ।५१।
कृते यद् ध्यायतो विष्णुं त्रेतायां यजतो मखै: । द्वापरे परिचर्यायाँ कलौ तद्धरिकीर्तनात् ।५२॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराण पाग्महंस्यां संहितायां द्वाददाम्कन्धे तृतीयाऽध्याय. 121

In the age of Kali men will become slaves of women and miserable. Sexual pleasure
being the (only) ground of their affection, they will forsake their parents, brothers and (other)
relations and kinsfolk and take counsel with their sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law (alone). (37)
Sudras will make their living by putting on the garb of hermits and receive charitable gifts.
Those who have no knowledge of religion will occupy high seats and preach religion.(38)
Oppressed with famine and (heavy) taxation—land being divested of food-grains—and
stricken with fear of droughts, people in the Kali age will ever remain perturbed in mind.
Destitute of clothes and ornaments. {nay, even) food and drink, bed and sexual enjoyment,
they will go even without a bath and put on the appearance of a fiend. (39-40) Quarrelling
even fora very small sum of money equivalent to 20 cowries, having cast (all) goodwill to the
winds, people in Kaliyuga will kill even their own people and part with their own dear life.(41}
Mean-minded fellows wil! concern themselves only with the gratification of their lust and
satisfaction of their hunger and fail to maintain even their aged parents; while parents will
disown their sons, though clever in all matters. (42) With their mind perverted by heretics,
Oking, mortals in Kaliyuga will not generally worship Visnu (the immortal Lord), the highest
object of adoration for the (whole) universe, whose lotus-feet are bowed to by the rulers of
the three worlds.(43) People in Kaliyuga will not worship Him by uttering whose name (even)
helplessly while dying or afflicted, toppling down or stumbling, man is freed from (all)
impediment in the shape of Karma and reaches the highest goal. (44) Enthroned in the mind
of men Lord Sri Hari (the Supreme Person) drives away all evils occasioned by the Kali age
and arising from substances, place and mind. (45) Heard of or glorified (by chanting Hisname
or singing His praises}, meditated upon and worshipped or even honoured, the Lord stays
in men’s heart and drives away (all} their sins committed in thousands of lives. (46) Dwelling
in the mind of Yogis (strivers} Lord Visnu wipes out the seeds of their evil Karma in the same
way as fire applied to gold burns all its impurities caused by (its admixture with other) metals. (47)
The mind (of a man) does not attain absolute purity through worship of gods, asceticism, control
of breath, friendliness (towards all}, a bath in sacred waters, observance of sacred vows,
