354

JODO iiOi rR ee eee nee eee oe

निशम्य देवकी देवी रुक्मिण्यानकदुन्दुभि: | सुहृदो easier बिलात् कृष्णमनिर्गतम् । ३४1
wad mode दु:खिता द्वारकोकस: । उपतस्थुर्महामायां gt कृष्णोपलब्धये ।३५॥
तेषां तु देव्युपस्थानात् प्रत्यादिष्टाशिषा स च । प्रादुर्बभूव सिद्धार्थ: सदारो हर्षयन् aft ।३६॥
उपलभ्य हषीकेशं मृतं पुनरिवागतम्।सह पत्या मणिग्रीवं सर्वे जातमहोत्सवा: । ३७1
Not finding Sri Krsna {a scion of Surasena) return (ever) since He entered the cave and
disappeared into it, the people (that had accompanied Him to its mouth and had been left
behind by Him there) returned to their city (Dwaraka), full of grief, having waited (there) for
(as many as) twelve days. (33) Hearing (from them) that Sri Krsna had not come out of the
cave (till then), Devaki (Sri Krsna’s mother), the divine Rukmini (SriKrsna’s premier Spouse)
and Vasudeva as well as His (other) relations and kinsmen grieved for Him. (34) Cursing
Satrajit, the aforesaid citizens of Dwaraka, stricken (as they were) with grief, worshipped
(prayed to) Goddess Durga (known by the name of Candrabhaga), the Supreme Energy
(of the Lord), for the (safe) return of Sri Krsna. (35) Thanks to their worship ‘of (and
prayers to) the Goddess and the benediction pronounced (by the Goddess) in response
to their prayer, as a matter of fact, the said Sri Hari appeared (all of a sudden) in their
midst accompanied by His (new) bride (Jambavati), and gladdening them (all by His
dramatic appearance), His purpose (in the shape of recovery of the Syamantaka gem)
having been accomplished. (36) All were filled with great joy to find Sri Krsna (the Ruler
of the senses), as though returned to life after death, with His (new) bride and with the
gem about His neck. (37)

सत्राजितं समाहूय सभायां राजसन्निधौ । प्राप्तिं चाख्याय भगवान्मणिं तस्मै न्यवेदयत् । ३८॥
स चातिव्रीडितो रत्नं गृहीत्वावाङ्मुखस्तत: । अनुतप्यमानो भवनमगमत् स्वेन पाप्मना । ३९1
सोऽनुध्यायंस्तदेवाघं बलवदट्विग्रहाकुल: | Ha मृजाम्यात्मरज: Teles वाच्युत: कथम् ।४०॥
किं कृत्वा साधु महयं स्यान्न दापेद् वा जनो यथा । अदीर्घदर्शनं क्षुद्रं मूढं द्रविणलोलुपम् ।४१॥
दास्ये दुहितरं तस्मै dha waa च । उपायोऽयं समीचीनस्तस्य ot चान्यथा is
एवं व्यवसितो Gam सत्राजित् स्वसुतां शुभाम् । मणिं च स्वमुद्यम्य कृष्णायोपजहार ह ॥४३।
a सत्यभामां भगवानुपयेमे यथाविधि । बहुभिर्वाचितां झशीलरूपौदार्यगुणान्विताम् iss
भगवानाह न मणिं प्रतीच्छामो वयं नृप । तवास्तां देवभक्तस्य ad च फलभागिन: ।४५॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे स्यमन्तकोपाख्याने षट्पञ्चादत्तमोऽध्याय: 148 |

[ Dis. 58

व nn mito ore etre en rteiracton tb start

Duly summoning Satrajit into the royal presence at court and having told him how He had
recovered the gem, the Lord handed it over to him. (38) Full of great shame he took the gem
and with his head cast down returned home thence, repenting for his sin {in the shape of
flouting the divine command and calumniating the Lord). (89) Brooding over that sinful act
(of his) alone and feeling nervous over the unpleasantness, created with the mighty (Sri
Krsna and His followers), he thought (within himself), "How shall be able to wipe off my guilt
and how could Sri Krsnabe conciliated ? (40) What course will prove expedient for meorwhat
should be done so that people may not curse me, short-sighted, mean, stupid and covetous
of wealth as | am ? (41) I shall give away to him my daughter, a (veritable) jewel among
women, as well as the (Syamantaka) jewel. This will be the proper remedy as there will be
no end of quarrel otherwise." (42) Having thus resolved by recourse to reason, and moving
in the matter himself, Satrajit made a present to Sri Krsna of his own blessed daughter as
well as of the gem: so the tradition goes. (43) The Lord espoused according to the scriptural
ordinance the said girl, Satyabhama (by name), (who was) solicited by many and (was) gifted

