Dis. 42 } BOOK TEN 281

मन्भ्नमनग्मयसयय्यसयणससररससससभिवमभभव व यचि न व 3२ व त्तवै Ss oy aeRO seer een earn

to be two foremost gods. (22) While They were (yet) roving at will, the sun set on Them.
Surrounded by the cowherds, Sri Krsna and Balarama (now) returned to Their carts outside
the city. (23) In the case of those who gazed in Mathura (the city founded by the demon
Madhu) on the elegance of the personality of Sri Krsna (the Jewel among men)—which lo!
Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity} coveted as Her abode, leaving (all) others who
sought Her—the predictions that the cowherd women, afflicted at the thought of their
separation (irom SriKrsna), had made at the time of departure (from Vraja) of SriKrsnacame
to be (literally) true. (24) With Their feet duly washed and partaking of rice cooked in milk (with
sugar), and having come to know what Karhsa intended to do (the next day), the two Brothers
passed that night happily. (25)
कंसस्तु धनुषो wy रक्षिणां स्वबलस्य च । वधं fara गोविन्दरामविक्रीडितं परम् । २६॥
दीर्घप्रजागरो भीतो दुर्निमित्तानि दुर्मति: । बहून्यचष्टोभयथा पृत्योर्दीत्यकराणि च ।२७॥
अदर्शनं स्वशिरस: प्रतिरूपे च सत्यपि । असत्यपि द्वितीये च द्वैरूप्यं ज्योतिषां तथा । २८॥
छिद्रप्रतीतिर्छायायां प्राणघोषानुपश्रुति: | स्वर्णप्रतीतिर्वृक्षेषु स्वपदानामदर्शनम् । २९॥
स्वप्ने प्रेतपरिषङ्ख: wes विषादनम्।यायान्नलदमाल्येकस्तैलाभ्यक्तो दिगम्बर: 1301
अन्यानि चेत्थं भूतानि स्वप्नजागरितानि च । ce मरणसन्त्रस्तो निद्रां लेभे न चिन्तया । ३१॥
Karnsa, on the other hand, felt dismayed to hear of the breaking of the (huge) bow and
the destruction of its keepers as well as of his own detachment— which was a mere child's
play on the part of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and Balarama. Getting no sleep fora long
time, the evil-minded fellow saw both in dream and while awake many an evil portent
foreboding death and foreshadowing infamy. (26-27) Even though his reflection could be
seen (in a mirror etc.) the head was not visible. Nay, the luminaries likewise appeared
duplicated although no other object (such as a finger etc.) intervened (between his eye and
the luminary). (28) Holes were seen by him in his shadow and the (whizzing) sound which
is heard inside the ears on closing them was not heard by him. Trees appeared (to him)
golden (in hue) and he failed to see his footprints (on sands, mud etc.). (29) In dreams he
was embraced by his deceased relations, rode on a donkey, swallowed poison and went
about all alone adorned with a wreath of china roses, smeared with oil and having nocovering
on his body except the quarters. (30) Beholding similar other scenes both in dreams and in
waking life and terribly afraid of death, Karhsa did not have a wink of sleep in his anxiety. (31)
व्युष्टायां निशि कॊरव्य सूर्ये चाद्भ्य: समुत्थिते । कारवामास & कंसो मल्लक्रीडामहोत्सवम् 122 |
amd yer तूर्यभेर्यश्च जघ्निरे। मञ्चाश्चालङ्कृता: स्रग्भि: पताकाचैलतोरणै: ।३३॥
त्तेषु unt जानपदा ब्रह्मक्षत्रपुरोगमा: | यथोपजोषं विविद्यु राजानश्च कृतासना: ।३४॥
oe: परिवृतोऽमात्यै राजमञ्च उपावितत्।मण्डलेश्वरमध्यस्थो हृदयेन विदूयता 1341
वाद्यमानेषु तूर्येषु मल्लतालोत्तरेषु च । मल्ला: स्वलङ्कृता दृप्ता: सोपाध्याया: समाविशन् | ३६1
चाणूरो मुष्टिक: कूट: शलस्तोगल एव aia आसेदुरुपस्थानं वल्गुबाद्यप्रहर्षिता: iy!
नन्दगोपादयो गोपा भोजराजसमाहुता: । निवेदितोपायनास्ते एकस्मिन् मञ्च ame ।३८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामन्कन्धं पूर्वार्घे मल्लगङ्खोपवर्णनं नाम Beattie: ॥४२॥
When the night passed and the sun rose from the (eastern) waters, 0 scion of Kuru,
Kamsa actually had a grand festival of wrestling bouts to be celebrated. (32) The men (of
Karhsa) swept the arena, sprinkled it with water and decorated it with flowers and garlands

eic.; trumpets and tabors were sounded and the galleries (for the spectators) were adorned
with garlands, flags, tapestries and temporary arches. (33) On them were comfortably

[565] B.M. Part I-38

