Dis. 84] BOOK TEN 473

RARER १ ११ १ ७9 EMRE १ १ #५.१ 9७ 9५७७ 4.७.#.१.#.#9 # # 9७9 # ##.94.#4.^१%## ER EEROREREEEEREREOR ARERR EEE

उत्सिक्तभक्त्युपहताशयजीवकोशा आपपुर्भवद्गतिमथोऽनुगृहाण भक्तान्। २६॥

The sages said: (Lord, even) great progenitors of the world (like Marici) and the
highest sages like us stand deluded by Your Maya (enchanting power). The almighty
Lord of the universe, You behave like an ordinary creature, concealing Your true Self
behind Your seemingly human activities. Oh, (all) Your sports are (really) most wonderful. (16)
Just as the earth (though one) assumes different names and forms through its various
products (viz., the tree, stone, jar etc., which are essentially the same as the earth),
even so, though one, You assume various names and forms and, though static, You
create and protect the universe and (finally) swallow up the same by Your own Self and
(yet) these activities do not bind You. Oh, what is all this but a mere sport on Your part,
O perfect one! (17) (Lord,) though You are the (supreme) Spirit beyond the realm of
Prakrti (Nature), You assume from time to time a Form made of pure Sattva for the
protection of Your devotees and suppression of the wicked and by Your example
maintain (and perpetuate) the eternal Vedic path. (Really speaking) it is You who
manifest Yourself in the form of the different castes and orders. (18) (Lord,) the Vedas
constitute Your immaculate heart; through askesis, study, meditation and Samadhi
(absorption) You are realized there in both Your Manifest and Unmanifest aspects, as
well as in Your transcendental aspect which is beyond these two (and is the substratum
of both). (19) Since You are known through the medium of the Vedas (which are stored
in the heart of the Brahmanas), it is the Brahmanas who are the real medium of your
realization. O Perfect One ! that is why You are the foremost patron of the Brahmanas,
and that is why You honour them so much. (20) In You lies the culmination of all
blessings; You are the sole refuge of saints. Having met You today we have attained
the fruition of our birth, learning, austerities and wisdom. (21) (Lord!) Your wisdom is
unbounded: You are the Supreme Spirit, the Embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
You have concealed Your glory by Your own Yogamaya (enchanting power). We offer
salutation to You as such. (22) The kings assembled here, and even the Yadus, who
enjoy life together (with You), do not (truly) know You as the Universal Soul, the Time-
spirit and Ruler of the universe, veiled as You are by Your own Maya. (23) As a
dreaming person looks upon all objects of his dream as real, and regards his dream-
formed body which is perceived (only) with the mind and exists in name alone—as his
self, and not the body of his waking life, which is out of his mind for the time being,
(even) so (in waking life) when the mind gets deluded by Maya in the form of the
wandering of the senses among their objects which exist only in name, its discrimination
gets clouded, and the Jiva fails to realize You who stand beyond the waking life.(24-25)
(O Lord !) sages who have attained ripeness of Yoga succeed in enthroning in their
heart Your lotus-feet, which are the origin of the holy waters of the Ganga, which wipe
off heaps of sins. We are glad we have seen those feet today. Lord, we are Your
devotees. (Pray) shower Your grace on us. Now the (highest) state of Your realization
is attained only by those who through their overflowing devotion succeed in shedding
their ego, which obscures the souls. (26)

SYR उवाच
इत्यनुज्ञाप्य दाशार्हं धृतराष्ट्रं युधिष्ठिरम् । राजर्षे स्वाश्रमान् गन्तुं मुनयो दधिरे मन:। २७॥
ae dea aqua वसुदेवो महायशा: । wre चोपसंगृह्य बभाषेदं सुयन्तित:। २८॥
Sri Suka continued: O royal sage ! having thus (praised and) taken leave of the Lord,

King Dhrtarastra and (the virtuous) Yudhisthira, the sages thought of returning to their
hermitages. (27) Perceiving this, the illustrious Vasudeva approached them. Bowing to them,

[565] B.M. Part II—44

