Dis. 7] ~ BOOK THREE । 163

AHECAKRSKEKEARATE VHA करो कोत् ककक कक दाज कक रीत्यैऽशि-शिज्येककज्ये पे पि वी TEENA MES AH डच जो
जयप्तर्त

to me now about the glorious manifestations (Brahma and others) of that Cosmic Being, from
whom were evolved along with their sons and grandsons, great grandsons and kinsmen,
living beings of various forms and shapes, who filled this universe. (23-24) Who are the
Prajapatis (lords of created beings) that were evolved by Brahma (that lord of Prajapatis)?
Again, what are the main categories of beings that he created and what are their subdivisions ?
And in what orderdid he evolve the fourteen Manus (Swayambhuva and others), that preside
over one full Manvantara each ? (25) Pray, also let me know their lines of descant and narrate
the doings of their descendants; and further describe, O Maitreya (son of Mitra), the relative
position and dimensions of the spheres that are located above and below the earth, as well
as Of the terrestrial region,and the detailed process of creation of beasts, human beings and
gods, reptiles and birds, in short, of all living beings—viviparous and oviparous, those born
of sweat and those sprouting from the soil (such as trees and plants). (26-27) Also kindly
recount at length the glorious exploits—connected with the creation, preservation and
dissolution of the universe—of the Lord who is the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and
prosperity), and who bodied Himself forth as Brahma, Visnu and Siva, His manifestations
with reference to a particular Guna (mode of Prakrti). (28) O lord, further tell me the grouping
of society into so many Varnas (grades or classes) and Agramas (stages of life) on the basis
of outward marks, conduct and temperament, the birth and doings etc., of the Rsis (seers)
and the division of the Vedas, the extensive details of sacrifices, the path of Yoga
(disinterested action), the path of renunciation and the path of Knowledge or discrimination
between Matter and Spirit, the Vaisnava Cult (the Paficaratra Agama) taught by the Lord (to
the sage Narada), the heterogeneity caused by the dissemination of heretic doctrines, the
descent of races through a mother belonging toa higher caste than the father, and the nature
and variety of destinies reached by men after their death according to their Gunas
(characteristics) and Karma (doings). (29—31)
धर्मार्थकाममाक्षाणां निमित्तान्यविरोधत: | वार्ताया दण्डनीतेश्च श्रुतस्य च विधिं पृथक् 1321
ge च विधिं ब्रह्मन् पितॄणां सर्गमेव च । ग्रहनक्षत्रताराणां कालावयवसंस्थितिम् 1331
दानस्य तपसो वापि यच्चेष्टापूर्तयो: फलम्।प्रवासस्थस्य at धर्मो ay qa उतापदि । ३४॥
ma वा भगवांस्तुष्येद्धर्मयोनिर्जनार्दन: | सम्प्रसीदति वा येषामेतदाख्याहि चानघ 134i
अनुव्रतानां शिष्याणां पुत्राणां च द्विजोत्तम । अनापृष्टमपि ब्रूयुर्गुरवो दीनवत्सला: 1361
तत्त्वानां भगवंस्तेषां कतिधा प्रतिसंक्रम: ।तत्रेमे क उपासीरन् क उ स्विदनुशेरते 1301
पुरुषस्य च संस्थानं स्वरूपं वा परस्य AIA च नैगमं यत्तद्गुरुशिष्यप्रयोजनम् । ३८॥
निमित्तानि च तस्येह प्रोक्तान्यनघं सूरिभि: । स्वतो ज्ञानं कुत: Gar भक्तिर्वैराग्यमेव वा ।३९॥
एतान्मे पृच्छत: प्रश्नान् हरे: कर्मविवित्सया ae मेऽज्ञस्य मित्रत्वादजया नष्टचक्षुष: ।४०॥
wd वेदाश्च amg at दानानि चानघ । जीवाभयप्रदानस्य न adie कलामपि ive
Also tell me, O holy Brahmana, the means conducive severally to religious merit, worldly
riches, sensuous enjoyment and final beatitude without prejudice to one another, the
methods, one by one, of agriculture, trade etc., as well as of administration of justice and
study of the Vedas, the method of performing Sraddha (a ceremony in honour and for the
benefit of dead relatives) and even so the evolution of the Pitrs (the manes), and likewise the
relative position of the planets, lunar mansions and other stars among the heavenly bodies
as determining the divisions of time. (32-33) What is the reward of charitable gifts, austere
penance, sacrificial acts and works of public utility (such as the digging of wells and tanks,

the construction of roads and temples, the cultivation of gardens etc.)? What are the duties
of one living abroad as well as of a man in adverse circumstances ? (34) Also tell me, O
