Dis. 8 ] ‘T° BOOK ONE 27

६.७. Se HRB Rr He We We Be Re MRE HE REA BEB RLY RR TAT BPE BT EERE THOR Mee Be BCR ROR ROR R MT HH BEBE BER ARR NCE RPO ROR ROE RL Be Be RERUN Roe
rE न Se व ना विशा

Therefore,carry out both these commands of Mine. (53) Redeem the promise you made
while consoling your beloved consert; at the same time do what is agreeable to Bhimasena
and Draupadi (the daughter of the king of Paficala) as well as to Myself.(54)

Yd उवाच त्वा

अर्जुन सहसाऽऽज्ञाय हरेर्हार्दमथासिना। मणिं wer मूर्धन्यं द्विजस्य सहमूर्धजम् । ५५॥

विमुच्य रशनाबद्धुं बालहत्याहतप्रभम्।तेजसा मणिना हीनं शिबिरान्निरयापयत् ius |

amt द्रव्रिणादानं स्थानान्निर्यापणं तथा । एष fe ब्रह्मवन्धूनां वधो नान्योऽस्ति दैहिक: । ५७॥

पुत्रश्लोकातुरा: सर्वे पाण्डवा: सह कृष्णया । स्वानां मृतानां यत्कृत्यं चक्रुर्निर्हरणादिकम् । ५८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे द्रौणिनिग्रहो नाम सप्तमोऽध्याय: ॥ ७ ॥

Sita says ; Arjuna instantly understood the mind of Sri Hari, and with his sword cut off
the gem onthe Brahmana's head along with his locks. (55) Releasing ASwatthama, who had
been bound with cords and put out of countenance by the murder of boys, and who was now
deprived of his splendour and gem also, Arjuna expelled him from his camp. (56) Shaving
the head (as a token of disgrace), seizure of property and expulsion from a place (where one
happens to be)—this is the form of capital punishment prescribed for fallen Brahmanas;
there isno other corporeal form of capital punishment for them. (57) The'sons of Pandu along
with Krsna (Draupadi), who were all stricken with grief at the loss of their sons, performed
the cremation and other funeral rites in respect of their departed kinsmen. (58)

Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled the"Chastisement of ASwatthama (Drona's son)",
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

२९१
PII ier

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIII
The Lord delivers Pariksit in the womb and is extolled by Kuntt;
Yudhisthira gives way to grief
qd sara
अथ ते सम्परेतानां स्वानामुदकमिच्छताम् । aq सकृष्णा गङ्गायां पुरस्कृत्य ययु: स्रिय: । १ ।
तेनिनीयोदकंसवेंक्खिप्यचभृज्ञंपुन:।आहुता हरिपादाब्जरज:पूतसरिज्जले । २ |
ward = कुरुपतिं धृतराष्टं सहानुजम् । गान्धारीं पुत्रशोकार्तां yet कृष्णां च माधव: । ३ |
सान्त्वयामास मुनिभिर्हुतबन्धूञ्छुचार्पितान्। भूतेषु कालस्य गतिं दर्शययन्नप्रतिक्रियाम् । ४ ।

Sita says : Placing the ladies at the head and accompanied by Sri Krsna, they all then
repaired to the bank of the Ganga in order to offer oblations of water to their departed
kinsmen seeking such oblations. (1) Having offered water to the deceased and bitterly wept
for them, they all immersed themselves once more in the water of the Ganga, that had been
hallowed by contact with the dust of Sri Hari's lotus-feet. (2) Showing how all created beings
are subject to death, which cannot be averted, Lord Madhava (Sri Krsna) and the sages
(Dhaumya and others) consoled king Yudhisthira (the lord of the Kurus) and his younger

brothers (Bhima and others), Dhrtarastra and his wife, Gandhari (daughter of the king of
Gandhara), who was stricken with grief at the loss of her sons, as well as Prtha (Kunti) and
