Dis. 9 ] BOOK FIVE 471

PREHEAT HERSKA HCA द् री KSLA EL AKO TE REEL ATLA ERA HHL LEAR ARTA ARR A a च्यो
ee eh EE BEE BF ST

neglected by the boy—clinging to the ill-conceived notion that a son must be taught (under
all circumstances). But, before his ambition (of seeing his son a learned man) could be
realized, the Brahmana, who was himself steeped in error, was snatched away by the ever-
vigilant Death at his very home. (6) Thereupon the younger wife of the Brahmana entrusted
her twin-born children to (the care of) her co-wife and herself attained to the realm where her
(deceased) husband had gone, by (ascending his pyre and) dying after him. (7)

पितर्युपरते भ्रातर एनमतत्प्रभावविदस्त्रय्यां विद्यायामेव पर्यवसितमतयो न परविद्यायां जडमतिरिति

भ्रातुरनुशासननिर्बन्धान्न्यवृत्सन्त। ८। स च प्राकृतैर्दविपदपशुभिरुन्मत्तजडबधिरेत्यभिभाष्यमाणो यदा
तदनुरूपाणि प्रभाषते कर्माणि च स कार्यमाण: परेच्छया करोति विष्टितो वेतनतो वा याच्ञया यदृच्छया

वोपसादितमल्पं बहु me वाभ्यवहरति पफरं नेन्दियप्रीतिनिमित्तम्।

नित्यनिवृत्तनिमित्तस्वसिद्धविशुद्धानुभवानन्दस्वात्मलाभाधिगम सुखदु:खयोर्द्वन्द्वनिमित्तयो-
स्संम्भावितदेहाळिभमान।९। शीतोष्णवातवर्षेषु वृष इवानाबृताङ्गं पीन: = Were

fronfafete merenaftte dxeracrerrerht rear to war | We alert aera
ईहमान: स्वभ्रातृभिरपि केदारकर्मणि निरूपितस्तदपि करोति किन्तु न समं विषमं न्यूनमधिकमिति ae
कणपिण्याकफलीकरणकुल्माषस्थालीपुरीषादीन्यप्यमृतवदभ्यवहरति । ११ ।

On the father's death, the brothers (of the boy)—who were ignorant of his greatness and
who had concluded the knowledge of the three Vedas (throwing light on rituals alone) to be
the highest knowledge and attached no importance to the knowledge of the Self (which is
the highest knowledge)—decided to give up their insistence on teaching their brother, taking
him to be a dunce. (8) As for Bharata, when he was addressed as a lunatic, a dullard or a
deaf fellow by the common people, the two-footed brutes, he spoke words befitting such a
description and would do work as desired by others when compelled to do so. (Nay,) he
would eat any food got through forced labour or by way of remuneration (for services done
by him), by begging or without asking, no matter whether it was scanty or plentiful, tasteful
or bad, but never for the gratification of his senses. For, having realized his oneness with the
all-blissful Self—that is of the nature of absolute Consciousness, ever without cause and
shining by Itself—he never identified himself with the body in joy or sorrow occasioned by
pairs of opposites (such as honour and ignominy). (9) He roamed about like a bull, bare-
bodied alike in heat and cold, as well as in storm and rain, yet stout and muscular, with his
spiritual glory concealed under ( a coating of) dirt that he had put on by lying down to sleep
on the (bare) ground, and because of his never rubbing or washing his body—even like a
precious jewel (whose splendour had been obscured by dust)—his loins covered by a dirty
rag, and a still dirtier sacred thread on his person, and slighted by men who were ignorant
of his worth by being (contemptuously) called a Dwija (a member of the twice-born classes),
the son of a Brahmana ( a Brahmana in name only) and so on. (10) When, however, he was
seen seeking his morsel of food (livelihood) from othersthrough work done on wage, and was
(accordingly) set to work at the field even by his brothers, he did the same. But he nevercared
to know whether the ground was level or uneven and whether he did more or less ( than what
was required of him), and ate as ambrosia even broken rice, oil-cakes, husk, worm-eaten
grains and the charred remains of boiled rice etc., sticking to the bottom of a cooking-pot and
other such things. (11)

ay कदाचित्कश्चिद् वृषलपतिर्भद्रकाल्यै पुरुषपशुमालभतापत्यकाम:। 221 तस्य ह दैवमुक्तस्य
केदारान्वीरासनेनमृगवराहादिभ्य:संरक्षमाणमङ्गिर:प्रवरसुतमपश्यन्। १३ । अथ त एनमनवद्यलक्षणमवमृश्य
