394 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 64

सि EEA CREE EA Wee

कृष्ण: परिजनं प्राहं भगवान् देवकीसुत: । ब्रह्मण्यदेवो धर्मात्मा राजन्याननुशिक्षयन् । ३१1
et oat ब्रह्मस्वं भुक्तमग्मेर्मनागपि । तेजीयसोऽपि किमुत राज्ञामीश्वरमानिनाम् ।३२॥
नाहं हालाहलें मन्ये fad यस्य प्रतिक्रिया । ब्रह्मस्वं हि विषं प्रोक्तं नास्य प्रतिविधिर्भुवि ।३३॥
हिनस्ति विषमनत्तारं वह्निरद्धि: प्रशाम्यति। कुलं समूलं दहति ब्रह्मस्वारणिपावक: ।३४॥
wera दुरनुज्ञातं भुक्तं हन्ति त्रिपूरुषम्। प्रसह्य तु बलाद् भुक्तं दश पूर्वान् दशापरान् ।३५॥
राजानो Wiser नात्मपातं विचक्षते । Pre वेऽभिमन्यन्ते ब्रह्मस्वं साधु arian: 1361
गृह्णन्ति aed: पांसून् क्रन्दतामश्रुबिन्दव: । विप्राणां हृतवृत्तीनां वदान्यानां कुटुम्बिनाम् ।३७॥
राजानो राजकुल्याश्च तावतोऽब्दान्निरङ्कुशा: । कुम्भीपाकेषु werd ब्रह्मदायापहारिण: ।३८॥
wen Wen वा ब्रह्मवृत्तिं gta य:। षष्टिवर्षसहस्राणि विष्ठायां जायते कृमि: ।३९॥
न मे ब्रह्मधनं भूयाद् यद् गृद्ध्वाल्पायुषो नरा: । पराजिताङ्च्युता राज्याद् भवन्त्युद्वेजिनोऽहय: ।४०॥
विप्रं कृतागसमपि नैव द्रुह्यत मामका:। घ्नन्तं ag ङपन्तं वा नमस्कुरुत नित्यश: xe!
weg प्रणमे विप्राननुकालें समाहित: । तथा नमत यूयं च योऽन्यथा मे स दण्डभाक् ।४२॥
ब्राह्मणार्थो ह्यपहतो walt पातयत्यध: । अजानन्तमपि gh नृगं mania vst
एवं विश्राव्य भगवान् मुकुन्दो द्वारकौकस: । पावन: सर्वलोकानां विवेश निजमन्दिरम् ॥४४॥

(On the departure of King Nrga), Lord Sri Krsna, glorious son of Devaki, the Lover of
Brahmanas and an embodiment of virtue, addressed His people (as follows) with a view to
instructing those born of the Ksatriya class. (31) "The property of a Brahmana, even so little,
when misappropriated, cannot be digested even by one who is as powerful as Fire, much
less by a king who considers himself a ruler out of (false) conceit. (32) | do not consider the
most deadly poison to be a poison; for ithas an antidote. A Brahmana’s property is the real
poison; for (once it is misappropriated) there is no remedy for it in the world. (33) Poison kills
him (alone) who swallows it; fire can be put out with water. (But) the fire produced by the Arani
(a piece of wood used in kindling fire by attrition) of a Brahmana’s property burns a whole
family with its roots (the forbears). (34) The property of aman made use of without permission
brings ruin to three generations (viz., the man who uses it as well as his parents and sons);
if, however, it is wilfully taken and enjoyed by force, it will bring disaster to ten generations
before and ten generations after the enjoyer. (35) Foolish kings who, blinded by their royal
fortune, covet and enjoy a Brahmana’s Property, which is terrible as hell, do not realize to
what an abysmal depth they will have to fall. (38) Those despotic rulers who deprive liberal-
minded Brahmanas, having a large family, of their Property and means of livelinood, have
to suffer with their descendants the tortures of the hell called Kumbhipaka (where the sinners
are fried in boiled oil) for as many years as there are particles of earth moistened with their
tears while they weep. (37-38) Nay, he who deprives a Brahmana of his livelihood whether
given by himself or by another, lives as a worm born in the ordure for sixty thousand
years.(39) (It is My desire that) the property ofa Brahmana should never find its way to My
treasury, (for) men who (even) covet such property forfeit their longevity, suffer defeat at the
hands of their enemies, lose their kingdom and are born as dreadful serpents (after
death).(40) O My kinsmen, do no harm toa Brahmana even if he is guilty of an offence. Even
ifhe assaults you or pours abuse on you, salute him daily (in return).(41) Justas ! bow to them
with vigilance three times a day, so too do you. Whosoever does otherwise will receive
punishment from Me. (42) A Brahmana’s property, if misappropriated, brings about without
