Dis. 27 ] BOOK THREE 259

Rete er ar ee ATH Be BST Pe a BR eH Bh He RR ae A STE RH BR AE ER He eee

अथ सप्तविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVII
How to attain Liberation through the differentiation
- of Matter and Spirit ?
MATA TAT

प्रकृतिस्थोऽपि geal नाज्यते प्राकृतैर्गुणै: | अविकारादकर्तृत्वान्निर्गुणत्वाजलार्कवत् । १ ।

स we यर्हि प्रकृतेर्गुणेषभिविषज्जते। अहंक्रियाविमूढात्मा कर्तास्मीत्यभिमन्यते i २ ।

तेन संसारपदवीमवशो ऽध्येत्यनिर्वृत:।प्नत्सङ्गिक्तं॰: कर्मदोषै: सदसन्मिश्रयोनिषु । ३ |

अर्थे ह्यविंद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते। ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा । ४ ।

अत wa sari प्रसक्तमसतां ofr) भक्तियोगेन तीव्रेण विरक्त्या च wae ५ |

यमादिभियोंगपथैरभ्यसन् श्रद्धयान्वित: । मयि भावेन सत्येन मत्कथाश्रवणेन च । ६ ।

सर्वभूतसमत्वेन निर्वैरेणाप्रसङ्घत: । ब्रह्मचर्येण मोनेन स्वधर्मेण बलीयसा । ७ ।

यदृच्छयोपलब्धेन सन्तुष्ठटो faye ah: । विविक्तशरण: aed मैत्र: करुण आत्मवान् । ८ |

सानुबन्धे च देहेऽस्मिन्नकुर्वन्नसदाग्रहम्।ज्ञानेन दृष्टतत्त्वेन प्रकृते: पुरुषस्य च । ९ |

निवृत्तबुद्ध्यवस्थानो दूरीभूतान्यदर्शन: | उपलभ्यात्मनाऽऽत्मानं  चक्षुषेवार्कमात्मदूक् । Ro |

व सदाभासमसति प्रतिपद्यते। सतो बन्धुमसच्चक्षु सर्वानुस्यूतमद्वयम् 1221
The Lord continued : Just as the sun, though seen reflected in water, remains
unaffected by the attributes of water (such as coolness, unsteadiness and so on), so the
Spirit, though abiding in a material body, remains unaffected by its pleasurable and painful
experiences, being devoid of attributes and doership and, therefore, free from change. (1)
When, however, he gets attached to the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti, he begins to look upon
himself as a doer, being completely deluded by egotism. (2) Due to this sense of doership
he loses his peace of mind through evils attaching to action (in the shape of virtue and sin)
and brought about by association with Matter and, helplessly thrown into wombs of good,
evil and mixed types, has to undergo repeated births and deaths. (3) Justasa dreaming man
experiences sorrow—even though there is no real cause for it— (because he takes the things
seen in the dream to be real), even so for the man who dwells on the objects of senses,
the round of births and deaths does not cease, even though those objects do not exist
in reality.(4)Therefore, through concentrated practice of Devotion as well as through
dispassion one should gradually bring under control one's mind, addicted to the pursuit of
sense-objects. (5) Practising concentration of mind through Yama (self-control in the form
of non-violence etc.) and other paths of Yoga with reverence, he who has realized the Self
(as distinct from Prakrti) by means of sincere devotion to Me, and by listening to My stories,
by even-mindedness towards all beings and absence of enmity or attachment to any, by
practising continence and observing a vow of silence, and by devotion to one's own duty in
a spirit of dedication to God; who remains contented with whatever is got by chance (as a
dispensation of Providence) and takes food in a measured quantity, is ever given to
contemplation, lives in seclusion, andis calm and composed, friendly (to all), compassionate
and self-possessed; nay, by virtue of wisdom acquired through the perception of reality of
both Matter and Spirit, he who ceases to identify himself with his body and to regard those

