Dis. 12 } ७ ७ EIGHT 785

॥..३.३.३-३-3 ६६६३ ३ ६.६..६.६.३-३ ६६३3 3-5 ३.३.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.६..३.३.६.३.३ ३६3३ .३.३.३ ६३६ ३८७६ .॥ ६६२ ३३ .७.६.३. ६६६ eee ete eH

Sri Suka continued: Accepting the advice of the sage (Narada), the gods gave up anger
as well as the zeal for fighting; and being glorified by their attendants, all returned to
heaven.(45) Those who survived in that conflict took with the concurrence of Narada the
lifeless (body of their leader) Bali and made for the western hill (the mountain where the sun
is believed to set). (46) There USana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of the demons) restored to
life, by his (secret) science of reviving the dead, those whose limbs were intact and whose
neck was (still) whole. (47) Bali too had his senses of perception and consciousness restored
the moment he was touched by the sage Usana. Though vanquished (in battle), he did not
feel sorry, fully conversant as he was with the truth relating to the world (viz., that victory and
defeat etc., depended on one's good or evil destiny). (48)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse, forming part of the story relating to
the war between the gods and the demons, in Book Eight of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Det.
urd Sieve

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI
Infatuation of Lord Sankara
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
वृषध्वजो निशम्येदे योषिद्रूपेण दानवान्।मोहयित्वा सुरगणान्हरि: सोममपाययत्। १ |
वृषमारुह्य गिरिश: सर्वभूतगणैर्वृत: | सह देव्या ययौ द्रष्टुं यत्रास्ते मधुसूदन: । २ ।
सभाजितो भगवता सादरं सोमया भव:। सूपविष्टं saree प्रतिपूज्य स्मयन्हरिम् । ३ |
Sri Suka (son of Badarayana) resumed: Having heard that, enchanting the Danavas
by assuming the form of a (bewitching) damsel, Sri Hari had given nectar to drink to the hosts
of heaven, Lord Siva (who bears the device of a bull on His ensign and) who dwells on Mount
Kailasa, mounted, His bull along with His divine consort (Goddess Parvati) and,
surrounded (accompanied) by all the multitudes of evil spirits (forming His retinue), went to
the region (Vaikuntha) where Lord Visnu (the Destroyer of the demon Madhu) has His
(permanent) abode, in order to see Him. (1-2) Received by the Lord (Visnu) with (due)
reverence along with Uma (Goddess Parvati) and comfortably seated, the aforesaid Lord
Siva (the Source of the universe) smilingly spoke to Sri Hari as follows, paying homage to
Him in return. (3)
श्रीमहादेव उवाच
देवदेव (Tecate जगन्मय । सर्वेषामपि भावानां त्वमात्मा हेतुरीश्चर: । ४ |
आद्यन्तावस्य यन्मध्यमिदमन्यदहँ बहि: | चतोऽव्ययस्यनैतानितत् सत्यं ब्रह्म चिद्भवान् । ५ ।
qaa चरणाम्भोजं श्रेयस्कामा निराशिष: | विसृज्योभयत: ag मुनय: समुपासते । ६ |
a ब्रह्म पूर्णममृतं विगुणं विशोकमानन्दमात्रमविकारमनन्यदन्यत्।
विश्वस्य हेतुरुदयस्थितिसंयमानामात्मेश्वरश्च तदपेक्षतयानपेक्ष: । ७ ।
एकस्त्वमेव सदसद् wad च स्वर्णं कृताकृतमिवेह न वस्तुभेद: |
अज्ञानतस्त्वयि जनैर्विहितो विकल्पो यस्माद् गुणैर्व्यतिकरो निरुपाधिकस्य । ८ ।
