Dis. 86] BOOK TEN 487

eee RARER AS CARR hh ok शाण णात्त क य क सकाआश

इत्युपामन्तितो राज्ञा भगवाँल्लोकभावन: | उवास कुर्वन् कल्याणं मिथिलानरयोषिताम् 1301
The king (Bahulaswa) said : “ OLord, You are the soul of all created beings, the witness
of all hearts and self-effulgent. You have presently revealed Yourself to us, who have been
(constantly) contemplating on Your lotus-feet. (31) (O Lord!) You have appeared before us
just in order to vindicate that statement of Yours which You have (often) declared, viz., that
neither Sri Balarama (who is Your second Self) nor (Your better half) Laksmi (the goddess
of beauty and prosperity) nor (even Your child) Brahma are dearer to You than one who is
exclusively devoted to You. (32) Is there any man on earth who would abandon Your lotus-
feet even after he has come to know that You offer Your very self to those sages of serene
mind who regard nothing as their own (not even their body). (33) Appearing in the race of
Yadu, You have extended Your glory—which is capable of wiping out the sins of (all) the three
worlds—in order to put an end to the transmigration of men revolving on the whirligig of births
and deaths. (34) Hail to You, the almighty Sri Krsna of unrestricted wisdom, who have taken
to austerities in their mildest form in the person of the (divine) sage Narayana. (35) (Be
pleased to) stay in our house, O infinite Lord, for some days alongwith the sages, and purify
this line of Nimi with the dust of Your feet." (36) (O Parikst !) entreated thus by the king, Sri
Krsna (the almighty Lord), the Protector of the worlds, stayed on (at Mithila) in order to confer
blessings on the men and women of the place. (37)
श्रुतदेवोऽच्युतं प्राप्तं स्वगृहाञ्जनको यथा । नत्वा मुनीन् सुसंहष्टो धुन्वन् वासो aad ह । ३८॥
तृणपीठबृसीघ्रेतानानीतेषूपवेज्य स: । स्वागतेनाभिनन्द्याङ्घ्रीन् सभार्योऽवनिजे मुदा । ३९॥
तदम्भसा महाभाग आत्मानं सगृहान्वयम्।स्नापयाञ्चक्र उद्धर्षो लब्धसर्वमनोरथ: 1४०॥
फलार्हणोशीरशिवामृताम्बुभिर्मृदा सुरभ्या तुलसीकुशाम्बुजै: ।
आराधयामास यथोपपन्नया सपर्यया सत्त्वविवर्धनान्धसा ।४१॥
a तर्कयामास gal ममान्वभूद् गृहान्धकूपे पतितस्य सङ्गम: ।
a: सर्वतीर्थास्पदपादरेणुभि कृष्णेन चास्यात्मनिकेतभूसुरै: xe)
सूपविष्टान् वृक्तार्नाप्तेथ्याञ्जुक्तादेब उपस्थित: । सभार्यस्वजनापत्य उवाचाङ्भ्रयभिमर्दान: 143 1
(Dear Pariksit !) like the king of Videha, (the Brahmana) Srutadeva (too) was overjoyed
to find Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) and the sages arrived at his door and bowing to them
{all), he began to dance waving his cloth: so the tradition goes. (38) Bringing raised seats
made of straw and mattresses of KuSa grass (from inside his cottage or from his neighbours)
he requested the guests to sit on them and, greeting them with words of welcome, he gladly
washed their feet alongwith his wife. (39) With that water the highly blessed Brahmana
sprinkled himself as well as his house and his people, and felt that all his objects had been
achieved. He was (literally) transported with joy. (40) (Then) he propitiated (all) with whatever
articles of worship could be (easily) procured, namely, fruits (offered by way of an auspicious
present) and other offerings (such as sandal-paste, flowers, incense and lights), cool,
scented and sweet water, scented earth (for being used at the time of bath or for washing
one's hands and feet with), Tulasi leaves, KuSa grass and lotuses as well as with food which
promotes the quality of Sattva. (41) He reflected: “ (I wonder) how this meeting has been
possible for me, condemned as ! am to this hellish life of a householder, with Sri Krsna and
(these) sages, who have enthroned Him in their hearts, nay, the very dust of whose feet
brings sanctity to all holy places." (42) When the guests had partaken of his hospitality and
were comfortably seated, Srutadeva alongwith his wife, children and other relations, waited
on them, and, touching the feet of Sri Krsna (his principal guest), addressed them (as
follows). (43)

