Dis. 39 ] BOOK TEN 265

eT OIE for HE HET EY ECE Ee ORE ROU R ER EE SPEER ES TERE TEE OR ere OR CO

ghee) and witness the grand festival (of a bow-sacrifice). | hear the people of the (entire)
kingdom (of Mathura) are going (there)." Nanda, the chief of the Gopas, caused this to be
proclaimed by the watchman all over his Vraja. (12)

गोप्यस्तास्तदुपश्रुत्य बभूवुर्व्वथिता भृशम्।रामकृष्णो पुरीं नेतुमक्रूरं व्रजमागतम् ॥१३॥
काश्चित्तत्कृतहत्तापश्वासम्लानमुखश्रिय: | स्नंसद्दुकूलवलयकेशाग्रन्थ्यश्च काश्चन ।१४॥

अन्याश्च AIAG: । नाभ्यजानन्निमं लोकमात्मलोकं गता इव NRG
स्मरन्त्यश्चापरा: जौरेरनुरागस्मितेरिता: | हृदिस्पृशश्चित्रपदा fire: dag: स्रिय: 1१६1
nat सुललितां चेष्टां स्निग्धहासावलोकनम्। शोकापहानि नर्माणि प्रोद्दामचरितानि च ie!
feet मुकुन्दस्य भीता विरहकातरा: । समेता: सङ्घश: प्रोचुरश्नुमुख्योऽच्युताशाया: ।१८॥

The cowherd women, of whom so much has been said before, were sore distressed to
hear at that time of Akrara having arrived in Vraja to take Balarama and Sri Krsna to the
capital. (13) Some had the splendour of their countenance marred by the hot breaths
proceeding from the agony caused by that news; others found their scarfs and bangles
slipping off and their (braid-knots) loosened. (14) (Still) others, who had the functions of all
their senses suspended by concentrated thought of Sri Krsna, had no consciousness left of
their physical body, as though they had risen to the realm of the Spirit. (15) Other (cowherd)
women fainted as they recalled the talks of Sri Krsna (a scion of Sura), which touched (the
very chords of) their heart and consisted of wonderful expressions and were uttered with
smiles full of love. (16) Thinking of the most graceful gait and movements, glances
accompanied by loving smiles, jokes that dissipated grief and the extraordinary exploits of
Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), the Gopis—who were terror-stricken and agitated by
the (very) thought of the (impending) separation (from Sri Krsna), met together in groups and
feelingly talked to one another the whole night (as follows) with tears on their faces and their
mind absorbed in Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord). (17-18)

तांश्चाकृतार्थान् वियुनङ्घ्यपार्थकं विक्रीडितं तेऽर्भकचेष्टितं चथा 1१९1
त if ३ । = ।
छोकापनोदस्मितलेशसुन्दरं करोषि पारोक्ष्यमसाधु ते कृतम् ।२०॥

क्रूरस्त्वमक्रूरसमाख्यया स्म नश्चक्षुर्हि दत्तं हरसे बताज्ञवत् ।
चेनैकदेगेऽखिलसर्गसौष्ठवं त्वदीयमद्राक्ष्म PST: ।२१।

The Gopis said : 0 creator, there is no (trace of) compassion anywhere in you since,
having united embodied souls through friendly behaviour and affection, you disunite them
even when they have not yet (fully) realized their ambition. Your capricious acts are as
aimless as the movements ofa babe. (19) Having (once) revealed (tous) the face of SriKrsna
(the Bestower of Liberation) with lovely cheeks and a prominent nose, (nay,) overhung by
dark curly locks and charming with a gentle smile that dispels (all) grief, you are screening
it from our view. This act of yours is far from good. (20) You are cruel indeed in that under
the appellation of Akrira (not cruel) you are like an ignorant person taking away (from us)
the eye, given by you rself, with which we witnessed all your creative skill (concentrated) in
a single limb of Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) ! (21)
