Dis. 3] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 21

ष्ठे’प्र्भं/’/ब्दगो"“'/नींर्षं,"/॰’प्री.गॆर्धं/ध्नीयी'र्णंफ्’/मीं’/॰"“णंघ्नंणंक्लीगॆग्रंर्षार्श'//घ्नं'“र्षार्धार्शणं"र्धप्रैटुर्ये/षॆ/ळी*क्ली’/ब्दर्क्षगींद्बमाँग्नीर्गांब्दषंभंभ्रेर्षीगेळं’,’र्धीर्ग्र‘ठा’,’व्र/प्रै/र्भंक्लीक्ली'/’र्षीश्रीं‘/॥’॰’ष्टं’घ्नंर्शप्रै’॰’ग्रैग्रैश्चीर्श/“प्रीप्रीप्नंग्रंळंक्वळंद्द्व
all his glory and energy into the Bhagavata and disappeared in the ocean of Srimad
Bhagavata. (61) This constitutes, therefore, a visible verbal manifestation of Sri Hari. It
drives away (all) one's sins by being waited upon, heard, read or seen. (62) Therefore,
hearing it in a week has been recognized as superior to all ( other disciplines); (nay) in
Kaliyuga it has been declared to be the (only) righteous course excelling (all) other disciplines.(63)
Indeed this is the righteous course prescribedin the Kaliage for washing away allagony,poverty,
misfortune and sin as well as for the conquest of passion and anger. (64) Otherwise the Maya
of Lord Visnu is most difficult to get rid of even for the gods. How (then) can it be set aside
by men? Hence (with the object of getting over this Maya too) the course of hearing Srimad
Bhagavata in a week has been commended. (65)

Yd उवाच
एवं नगाहश्रवणोरुधर्मे प्रकाश्यमाने safe: सभायाम् ।
आश्चर्यमेकॆ समभूत्तदानीं तदुच्यते संश्रृणु ज्ञौनक त्वम् । ६६॥
wie: सुतौ dt तरुणौ गृहीत्वा प्रेमैकरूपा सहसाऽऽविरासीत् ।
श्रीकृष्ण tire हरे मुरारे नाथेति नामानि मुहुर्वदन्ती । ६७।
aa प्रविष्टा कथमागतेयं मध्ये मुनीनामिति तर्कयन्त: ec
a: कुमारा वचनं तदानीं कथार्थतो निष्पतिताधुनेयम्।
एवं गिर: सा wan fer wae निजगाद नम्रा । ६९॥

Sita went on : While the great virtue of hearing Srimad Bhagavata ina week's times was
thus being promulgated by the sages (Sanaka and his three brothers), a great marvel took
place in that assembly at that time. It is (presently) being narrated (to you). Listen you to it,
O Saunaka ! (66) Bhakti, which is identical with love (for God), appeared (ina living form) all
of a sudden, taking (with her) her aforesaid sons (Jfiana and Vairagya) resorted to their youth
and repeating the names of Sri Krsna ! Govinda! Hari! Murari! Lord! allin the vocative. (67) Those
present in that assembly saw the aforesaid arrived (there) clad in a most lovely attire and
adorned with jewels in the form of truths contained in Stimad Bhagavata. They (all) began
to speculate as to how she had come and how entered the assembly in the midst of
sages.(68) The juvenile sages (Sanaka and his three brothers) then made the (following)

observation:— "She has just emerged out of the substance of the story of Srimad Bhagavata."
Hearing these words, she alongwith her sons humbly spoke to the sage Sanatkumara (as

follows): (69)
भक्तिरुवाच

भवद्धिरद्यैव कृतास्मि yo कलिप्रनष्टापि कथारसेन ।
we तु तिष्ठाम्यधुना ब्रुवन्तु men se at गिरमूचिरे Fivol

Bhakti submitted : Almost dead in Kaliyuga, | have been reinvigorated by you and your
brothers this very day, having been fed with the nectar-like story of Srimad Bhagavata. (Pray)
tell me now as to where | should stay, O sons of Brahma! (Thereupon) they addressed the
following words to her : (70)

भक्तेषु गोविन्दसरूपकत्रीं प्रेमैकधत्रीं भवरोगहन्त्री ।
सा त्वं च तिष्ठस्व सुधैर्यसंश्रया feat वैष्णवमानसानि ive!
