Dis. 18} BOOK FIVE 509
Wee te We Hr te er SORE ORE ATT NE EERE BENE MIE MEI PME SE RI EE re RRO TOE RR TORR NORIO tt ar ir He eRe
त् MERE EEE HE HEHE HEM

“Though Your form is unseen by (remains hidden from the view of) all the guardians of
the spheres (Brahma and others). You move about (in the form of the vital airs) within and `
(as the atmospheric air) without (all living beings), making a loud noise (in the form of the
Vedas and thereby proclaiming Your existence). You are that (supreme) Ruler who has
brought this universe under control by means of (various) denominations (such as the
Brahmana, which serve as a basis for the varied injunctions and interdictions of the
scriptures), even as a showman controls a wooden puppet (by a wire). (26) Suffering from
the fever of jealousy, the guardians of the (different) spheres (Indra and others) were unable
without You (the life-giving principle) to protect the bipeds or quadrupeds, the mobile or the
immobile creatures—(in short,) whatever is seen in this world—in spite of their striving
severally as well as unitedly. (27) Holding (by a cord) this earth—a storehouse of annual
plants and creepers (etc.) —including myself (then known as Satyavrata) You, the birthless
Lord, sported far and wide with (great) vigour in the ocean, that was, at the time of universal
dissolution tumultuous with waves. Hail to such a Lord, the (inner) Controller of the
multitudes of animate beings !" (28)

हि x sftr Perch taf रि ह मा ह उ
पितृगणाधिपतिरुपधावति watt चानुजपति।२९॥। ॐ wh भगवते अकूपाराय
सर्वसत्त्वगुणविशेषणायानुपलक्षितस्थानाय AT ACAUT नमो भूम्ने नमो नमोऽवस्थानाय नमस्ते | ३० |

In Hiranmayavarsa, again, the Lord resides in (lit., having assumed) the form of the
(Divine) Tortoise. Alongwith the denizens of this subdivision of the earth, Aryama, the lord
of the hosts of manes, adores that most beloved manifestation of the Lord, and repeats this
prayer:—(29) "Hail, hail to You, the divine Tortoise, denoted by the mystical syllable OM and
possessed of a form consisting entirely of Sattvaguna, whose position is not open to
perception (because of Your staying under water)! Hail to the most ancient one !! Hail to the
omnipresent Lord !!! Hail, hail to the Support of all !!!!" (30)

संख्या न यस्यास्त्ययधोपलम्भनात् `तस्मै नमस्तेप्त्यपदेश्त्स्वपिपो। ३१॥
जं न — ; Safin af
wm: खे rat arose `एक: 1321
E । कविभि: कल्पितेयम्।
मख्याफ्यातच्चद्दृप्नाम्पनावततसौनम सांख्यनिदर्शनाय ते इति।३३॥

“The objective world, manifested as it is by Your own Maya (creative energy) and
observed in multitudinous forms, but whose extent cannot be correctly estimated because
of its being falsely perceived, is (as a matter of fact) Your own manifestation (nothing apart
from You). Your (essential) form, however, cannot be described (in words). Hail to You as
such ! (31) Itis You alone that are called by the name of a mammal a sweat-born creature,
an oviparous being, a plant, a mobile or immobile creature, a god, a Rsi (a superior class
of human beings endowed with preternatural vision or clairvoyance), a Pitr (mane), an evil
spirit, the world of the senses, the heaven-world (the celestial regions), the aerial world (the
space intervening between heaven and earth and inhabited by beings endowed with an
aerial body), the earth, a mountain, a river, an ocean, a Dwipa (one of the principal divisions
of the terrestrial world), a heavenly body or planet, a star (and so on). (32) Even though You
possess a numberless (endless) variety of names, forms and shapes, yet a (specified)
number of categories, (say, twenty-four) has been assumed in You by seers (like the divine
Kapila). The knowledge of Truth by means of which this number (plurality) is set aside is no

