468 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

ङ दौ व्ये डौ वित् कौयीकतीपितौ केव्या कौठि कपडितये दौक्तै KEEN PEEHREERPERE LEA ERTEE EEK EERE TERE ee eet tet iit
न्न् व सं त् द् ark

impressions imprinted (on her bosom) by the feet of that docile young ofa black antelope with
their tiny, lovely, most propitious and soft hoofs not only reveals the tracks of my fortune to
my wretched self, robbed of his wealth and therefore miserable, but at the same time adorns
her own person on all sides and turns it into a sacrificial ground* for the twice born seeking
after heaven or final beatitude. (23) (Observing the dark spot in the moon, which is likened
by poetic fancy to the figure of a deer, and imagining it to be his own pet deer) May it be that
the glorious moon-god (the lord of the stars), who is (so) kind to the afflicted, is protecting
(has taken under his own fostering care) that young deer, whose mother died from fear of
a lion, and that has strayedfrom its abode ? (24) (Deriving solace from this idea as well as
from the cool and refreshing moonbeams) Or is it that he is soothing—by the cool and placid
slobber, in the form of nectarean rays flowing copiously from his mouth through iove—me,
the lotus of whose heart has been burning with the flames of wild fire, in the form of agony
caused by separation from my pet (that was like a son to me), and who had followed (in
search of) that young of a deer." (25)
मृगदारकाभासेनस्वारब्धकर्मणायोगारम्भणतो विभ्रंशित:सयोगतापसो
भगवदाराधनलक्षणाच्च कथमितरथा जात्यन्तर एणकुणक आसङ्ख: साक्षान्नि:श्रेयसप्रतिपक्षतया
प्राक्परित्यक्तदुस्त्यजहृदयाभिजातस्य `तस्यैवमन्तरायविहतयोगारम्भणस्य राजर्षेर्भरतस्य

समाहितं HIS मनस्तत्तु पुनर्ममाबुधस्यारान्मृगसुतमनु परिसुस्राव। २९॥

Troubled at heart with such fantastic ideas, Bharata (who was engaged in austerities for
union with the Lord through Devotion and spiritual enlightenment) was diverted from the
practices leading to such union as well as from (devotional) practices in the form of worship
of the Lord by his own (evil) destiny appearing in the form of that young antelope ! Otherwise
how could there appear (such a strong) attachment for the young of a deer, that belonged
to a different species, in (the mind of) one who had already left his own sons, so difficult to
part with, as a direct impediment to (the attainment of) final beatitude. While the royal sage
Bharata was lost in self-oblivion, the practice of Yoga commenced by him having been thus
interrupted, and his mind (ever) engrossed in the thought of nourishing, protecting,
humouring and caressing the young deer, the hour of death, which is difficult to overpass and
which approaches with terrible speed, arrived even as a serpent would run up to the hope
of a rat. (26) Continuing even at that time to look intently on the deer, that was lamenting by
his side like a (real) son, with his thought fixed on that animal alone, Bharata, on quitting that
body (the body of a royal sage) simultaneously with the deer, attained (in his next birth) the
body of a deer as any other mortal would do (under similar conditions). Of course the memory
of his previous life did not leave him as did the dead body. (27) Recollecting—by virtue of the
sustained endeavours (in his previous existence) to propitiate the Lord—even in that
incarnation the cause of his being reborn as a deer, and repenting bitterly, he said (to himself

* The sanctity of a tracl of land inhabited by the black antelope is proclaimed by the Smrtis in the following words :—
यस्मिन् देशे मृग: कृष्णस्तस्मिन् धर्मान् निबोधत।

“Acquire the knowledge of your duties in that land where resides the black antelope."
