Dis. 50 J BOOK TEN 319

Fone २७७ nek rte fee eee ee eee rete eee EAE EE DHEA HERA AR TEAM ERE

Krsna—who was no other than Lord Sri Hari (Visnu) appearing in a human sembiance from
some motive (viz., for removing the burden of the earth), pondered over (reviewed) the
purpose of His descent (on this earthly plane) as well as on what was equal to the time and
place in question. (5-6) (He took no time in arriving at a decision and said to Himself,) "I shall
certainly destroy this army of all dependent chiefs, brought together by Jarasandha (the ruler
of the Magadhas), reckoned as many Aksauhinis strong and consisting of foot soldiers,
cavalry, chariots and elephants—a concentrated burden on the earth (and therefore easy
to dispose of). Jarasandha, however, is not tobe killed (at once) as (inthe event of his being
let off) he is expected to put forth renewed efforts to mobilize an army (so that | shall be
spared the trouble of hunting up evil-doers). (7-8) This present descent of Mine is directed
towards this very end, viz., removing the earth's burden, protecting the virtuous and wiping
out the vile. (9) (why this alone.) other (divine) forms too (suchas those ofa boarandaman-
lion) are duly assumed by Me (from time to time) for the vindication of righteousness as well
as for putting a stop to (the mad career of) unrighteousness gaining ascendancy during
certain periods.” (10)

एवं ध्यायति गोविन्द area सूर्यवर्चसौ । रथावुपस्थितौ aa: ससूतौ सपरिच्छदो ।११॥
आयुधानि च दिव्यानि पुराणानि यदृच्छया । दृष्टा तानि हृषीकेश: सङ्कुर्षणमथाब्रवीत् । १२1
wad व्यसनं प्राप्तं यदूनां त्वावतां प्रभो । एष ते रथ आयातो दयितान्यायुधानि च । १३।
यानमास्थाय जह्येतद् व्यसनात् स्वान् Ayer wed fe नौ जन्म साधूनामीहा झर्मकृत् । १४॥
त्रयोविंशत्यनीकाख्यं भूमेर्भारमपाकुरु । एवं सम्मन्त्य Tae दंशितौ रथिनौ पुरात् ।१५॥
निर्जग्मतु: स्वायुधाढ्यौ बलेनाल्पीयसाऽऽवृतौ । शङ्खं cen fatter हरिर्दारुकसारथि: । १६॥
ततोऽभूत् परसैन्यानां ae वित्रासवेपथु: । तावाह मागधो वीक्ष्य हे कृष्ण पुरुषाधम । १७1
न त्वया योद्धुमिच्छामि बालेनैकेन लज्जया । गुप्तेन हि त्वया मन्द न योत्स्ये याहि बन्धुहन् । १८॥
va ow owe sal युध्यस्व धैर्यमुद्वह । fer वा मच्छरैर्छिन्नं देहं स्वर्याहि मां जहि ee!

While Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) was thus contemplating, there presently alighted
from the heavens two chariots, possessing the effulgence of the sun and (each) accompanied
by acharioteer and fitted with (necessary) appurtenances (such as armour and ensign). (11)
There also appeared of their own accord eternal divine weapons (of the Lord). Perceiving
them, Sri Krsna (the Controller of the senses) immediately spoke to Sankarsana (as
follows):—(12) "See, noble Brother, the calamity that has come upon the Yadus, of whom
You are the Guardian, O Lord! Here is Your chariot come, as well as Your favourite weapons
(the plough, pestle and so on), (13) Mounting the vehicle, sweep off this army and completely
deliver Your people (thereby) from the disaster (that stares them in the face). Surely to this
end is directed Our descent, which brings happiness to the virtuous, O Lord ! (14) Remove
the earth's burden going by the name of the twenty-three Aksauhinis.” Having thus fully
deliberated, Balarama and Sri Krsna (the two Scions of Dasarha) rode out of the city in their
respective chariots, clad in armour and armed with Their own weapons and surrounded by
avery small detachment. Coming out of the city into the open land, Sri Hari, who had Daruka
for His charioteer, blew His conch (thereby challenging the enemy to encounter Them). (15-16)
From that followed a shivering occasioned by terrorin the heart of the enemy's ranks. Looking
intently at the two (divine) Brothers, Jarasandha (the ruler of the Magadhas) said to Them,
"O Krsna, the vilest among men, for very shame | do not wish to fight with you, a youngster,
(especially) when youare alone. (No,)lam not going to have an encounter with you, O stupid
fellow, who remained concealed (so long); (therefore), get away, O slayer of your (own)
maternal uncle ! (17-18) If there is an itching in you (for a combat), O Balarama, offer battle
