462 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

६.०.६.३.३.३.३.३.७.७.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३-.३.३.३.३.३ ३३३३ .६ ३३ ६३६ व HE RAED EEEHKE SEETHER AK ETS HEAR ROA HHS eee 8३

This descent (manifestation) of the Lord was (specifically) intended to give a lesson in
the art of liberating oneself to those who are steepedin the quality of Rajas. (12) People recite
the following verses conformable to the spirit of such teaching:—’Oh, of (all) the Dwipas
(main divisions) and Vargas (subdivisions) of the earth, girt with the seven oceans, this land
(later known as Bharatavarsa) is exceptionally holy inasmuch as the people of this land
celebrate the blessed deeds of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Mura) associated with
His (various) descents. (13) Oh, the race of Priyavrata is resplendent with glory; for,
descendingin this line, Bhagavan Narayana (the most ancient Person), the Inner Controller
of all and the Cause ofall causes, observed sacred vows leading to Liberation (which cannot
be attained through religious rites). (14) Indeed what Yogi—who hankers after the mystic
powers of Yoga, spurned by Lord Rsabhadeva because of their illusory nature, even though
striving to serve Him—could even mentally follow in the footsteps of that birthless Lord?” (15)

oft ह स्म वेदलोकदे य raf रि रितमीरितं पुंसां
वासुदेव एकान्ततो भक्तिरनयोरपि समनुवर्तते।१६। चयस्यामेव कवय आत्मानमविरतं

विविधवृजिनसंसारपरितापे मै
परमपुरुषार्थमपि स्वयमासादितं नो एवाद्रियन्ते भगवदीयत्वेनैव परिसमाप्तसर्वार्था: | १७॥

In this way has been narrated (by me) the sacred story of the Lord bearing the name of
Rsabha, the supremely adored (even) of all the Vedas, the (various) spheres, the gods, the
Brahmanas and the cows—a story which wipes out all the sins of men (who hear or recite
it), and is the abode of the highest blessings. Exclusive devotion to the aforesaid Lord
Vasudeva is developed in the heart of him who constantly listens to it as well as of him who
regularly recites it (before others) with (ever) increasing reverence and with a concentrated
mind. (16) Daily and incessantly immersing their soul—(ever) burning with the agonies of
mundane existence, full of manifold sufferings—in (the stream of) Devotion and deriving
supreme solace from it, the wise (devotees) show no preference on any account for final
beatitude, the highest and everlasting object of human pursuit, even if got without asking
(offered by the Lord Himself), having fully realized their objects in their very devotion to the

Lord. (17)
राजन् पतिर्गुरुरलं भवतां यदूनां दैवं fra: कुलपति: क्व च किङ्करो व:।
अस्त्वेवमङ्ग भगवान् भजतां मुकुन्दो मुक्तिं ददाति कर्हिचित्स्म न भक्तियोगम्।१८।
नित्यानुभूतनिजलाभनिवृत्ततृष्ण श्रेयस्यतद्रचनया चिरसुप्तबुद्धे:।

AST य: करुणयाभयमात्मलोकमाख्यान्नमो भगवते TTT तस्मै।१९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे ऋषभदेवानुचरिते षष्ठोऽध्याय:। ६।

Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), dear Pariksit, was surely the protector,
preceptor, deity (the object of worship), beloved friend, and head of the family of your
grandfathers as well as of the Yadus, and sometimes (when He represented you as your
ambassador in the court of the Kauravas at Hastinapura) your servant too. He bestows now
and then (even) final beatitude on those who worship Him, but He never (exceptin very rare
cases) grants the boon of loving devotion (to His feet). (18) Obeisance to the celebrated Lord
Rsabhadeva, who is (entirely) free from all cravings, rich as He is in the eternal realization
of His own Self, and who in His (abounding) compassion revealed the true nature of the
Self—which is immune from all fear—to men whose mind had long remained oblivious of
their (genuine) welfare, being constantly engrossed in the thought of body etc., (which are
other than the Self). (19)
