Dis.9] . BOOK TWO . . 423’

HALA KKA KEELE TEL EK HEV ERE क LECCE HEREC KOCHEHRHCSCHHALE HEHEHE HNC H HEHE THERE KOH वी HHI

of one thousand celestial years (or 3,460,000 human years) penance which illumined all the
worlds (i.e., revealed to him a plan of the entire universe). (8)

तस्मै wets wear सभाजित: सन्दर्शयामास wt न यत्परम्।

पेतसंकेशविमो ॥ द्रिरविंबधैरगि प्रा
Wadd चत्र रजस्तमस्तयो: ad च fst न च कालविक्रम: |
. न a माया किमुतापरे हरेरनुव्रता यत्र सुरासुरार्चिता: 1201
श्यामावदाता: ङतपत्रलोचना: पिशङ्खवस्रा:: सुरुच: Wage: ।
सर्वे चतुर्बाहव उन्मिषन्मणिप्रवेकनिष्काभरणा:३ सुवर्चस: |
प्रवालवैदूर्यमृणालवर्चस: परिस्फुरत्कुण्डलमौलिमालिन: 128 1
भ्राजिष्णुभिर्य२ परितो fama लसद्विमानावलिभिर्महात्मनाम् |
विद्योतमान: प्रमदोत्तमाद्युभि:३ सविद्युदभ्रावलिभिर्यथा ay: 1221
प्रेङ्खे श्रिता या कुसुमाकरानुगैर्विगीयमाना प्रियकर्म गायती । १३1

Pleased (with his penance), the Lord fully revealed to him His own supreme Abode,
higher than which there is no other realm, nay, which is absolutely free from afflictions,
bewilderment and fear, and which is extolled on all sides by highly enlightened souls who
have been blessed with His sight. (9) Neither Rajas (passion) nor Tamas (the darkness of
ignorance), nor even Sattva (the quality of goodness) mixed with either prevails there. The
all-destroying Time too is powerless there and even so Maya (illusion); how, then, can the
progeny of Maya (attachment, greed etc.) find their way into that realm ? Nay, the attendants
of Sri Hari who reside there are adored by the gods and the demons alike. (10) Possessed
of a transparent swarthy complexion and lotus-like eyes, clad in yellow, most charming to
look at and extremely delicate of body, they are all endowed _with four arms, highly
resplendent themselves and further beautified by gold ornaments set with superb shining
gems. Some of them (who have not attained identity of form with the Lord) possess the hue
of corals, cat's-eyes or lotus stalks and are adorned with brilliant ear-rings, diadems and
garlands. (11) Glittering all round with rows of brilliant and glorious aerial cars of exalted
souls, which are further illumined with the splendour of most charming ladies, that divine
realm shines like the sky with its line of clouds accompanied by flashes of lightning. (12)
Endowed with a most lovely form, Sri (the goddess of fortune) adores in that realm the feet
of the Lord (who is widely sung ) in many ways with her other manifestations (figuring as her
female companions such as Bhudevi, Liladevi and so on). Nay, sitting in a swing, she sings
the exploits of her beloved lord, while her own praises are sung by the bees (the attendants
of Spring) at the time. (13)

wet तत्राखिलसात्वतां पति fra: off यज्ञपति जगत्पतिम् ।
सुनन्दनन्दप्रबलार्हणादिभि:र स्वपार्षदमुख्य: परिसेवितॆ विभुम् । १४॥
किरीटिनं कुण्डलिनं चतुर्भुजं drat वक्षसि लक्षितं frien
अध्यर्हणीयासनमास्थितं परॆ वृत चतु:षोडशपञ्चशक्तिभि: ।
युक्तं ut: स्वैरितरत्र aya: स्व wa धामन् रममाणमीश्वरम् ies
तद्दर्शनाह्लादपरिप्रुतान्तरो हृष्यत्तनु: प्रेमभराश्रुलोचन: |

ज
