696 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9°

LHERAHLAALLA EHR AHH ENWHARE SARE SELLE RKECH AHL ELE RENEE HAAN TEMREMRA eR HRA

are Carrying (on their shoulders) the burden of maintaining their family etc., for the illusory
delight proceeding from the objects of senses. (43) Ascetics desirous of their own liberation,
O Lord, generally practise silent meditation in solitude. They are (however) not devoted to
the interest of others. | (of course) do not long to be liberated alone, leaving behind these
miserable creatures. (For) | find no haven of rest other than You for these people wandering
in the forest of transmigration. (44)

यन्मैथुनादि गृहमेधिसुखं हि TS कण्डूयनेन करयोरिव दु:खदु:खम् ।
तृप्यन्ति नेह Fo बहुदु:खभाज: कण्डूतिवन्पनसिजं विषहेत ai: ।४५॥
मोनव्रतश्रुततपोऽध्ययनस्वधर्मव्याख्यारहोजपसमाधय आपवर्ग्य: |
प्राय: परं Gea ते त्वजितेन्द्रियाणां वार्ता भवन्त्युत न वात्र तु दाम्भिकानाम् ise
wa इमे सदसती तव वेदसृष्टे बीजाङ्कुराविव न ARIAT |
युक्ता: समक्षमुभयत्र विचिन्वते त्वां योगेन वह्निमिव दारुषु नान्यत: स्यात् ।४७॥
a वायुरम्निरवनिर्वियदम्बुमात्रा:: प्राणेन्दियाणि हृदयं चिदनुग्रहश्च ।
सर्वंत्वमेवप्तगुणोविगुणश्चभूपन्नान्यत्त्वदस्त्यपिमनोबचसानिस्कम्।४८।
आद्यन्तवन्त उरुगाय विदन्ति fe त्वामेवं विमृश्य सुधियो विरमन्ति seer ।४९॥
तत् तेऽर्हत्तम नम:स्तुतिकर्मपूजा: कर्म स्मृतिश्चरणयो: श्रवणं कथायाम् ।
संसेवयात्वयिव्रिनेतिपङ्मन्याकिंभक्तिंजन:पस्पहंसगतौलभेत।५०।

That which goes by the name of pleasures enjoyed by a householder, suchas copulation,
is trivial; for it results in suffering after suffering akin to that caused by the scratching of one
(itching) hand with another. (But) though undergoing a lot of trouble, the wretched people
(given up to sensual gratification) do not feel sated with these pleasures. (Only) some wise
man is able (by Your grace) to curb passion like the itching sensation. (45) A vow of silence,
fasting, the hearing of scriptures, asceticism, the study of sacred books, discharging one's
sacred obligations, exposition of the scriptures, living in seclusion, the muttering of prayers
and concentration of mind, conducive as they are to final beatitude, O Inner Controller,
generally only prove to be the means of livelihood of those who have not yet been able to
conquer their senses (and are prone to sell these for base gain in the shape of money and
sensuous pleasures); whereas they may or may not be so in the case of hypocrites (whose
pietism may or may not succeed). (46) Like the seed and the sprout (following in unbroken
succession), the Unmanifest (primordial Matter) and the manifest (the visible universe)—
these are (but) Your two forms (symbols) made known by the Vedas; (for there is nothing
other than You, who are devoid of (a material) form. Through Yoga (the process of Devotion)
men who have controlled their mind are directly able to perceive You in both these (forms),
as fire in pieces of wood (through attrition), which is not possible by any other means. (47)
You are the air, fire, earth, ether and water, the (five) objects of senses (viz., sound, touch,
sight, taste and smell), the (five) vital airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana),
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the mind, the
intellect and the ego (or, according to another interpretation, the deities presiding over the
Indriyas and the mind). That which is qualified (gross or material) and that which is
unqualified (subtle or transcendental)—everything is You and You alone, O infinite One !
Whatever is revealed by mind or speech is no other than You. (48) Neither these Gunas
(modes of Prakrti, viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) nor the deities who preside over the (three)
Gunas (viz., Visnu, Brahma and Siva) nor the categories commencing from Mahat-tattva
