ps 2 व व “BOOK TWO । 91

लसन्महारत्नहिरण्मयाङ्गदं स्फुरन्महारत्नकिरीटकुण्डलम् । ९ ।
see कोस्तुभरत्नकन्धरमम्लानलक्ष्या वनमालयाऽऽचितम् । १०॥
रि ञ्रितनी ven A aw
अदीनलीलाहसितेक्षणोल्लसद्भ्रूभङ्गसंसूचितभूर्यनुग्रहम् ।

ईक्षेत चिन्तामयमेनमीश्वरं यावन्मनो धारणयावतिष्ठते 1221
fad जितं स्थानमपोह्य धारयेत् परं at शुद्ध्यति धीर्यथा यथा । १३
Wad wate: पुरुषस्य रूपं क्रियावसाने yaa: स्मरेत ।१४॥

Some people fix their mind, through meditation, on the Lord with four arms, bearing
severally a lotus, a discus, aconch andamace, and residing in the cavity of their heart within
their own body in a form as big as in thumb in height.(8) With a cheerful countenance and
big lotus-like eyes He has a cloth, yellow as the filaments of a Kadamba flower, wrapped
round His person, and is adorned with a pair of gold armlets studded with precious brilliant
jewels, a crown and a pair of ear-rings inlaid with valuable radiant jewels. (9) His feet, which
are tender like young shoots, are installed by the masters of Yoga at the centre of the full-
blown lotus of their heart. He bears (a little above His left breast) a golden streak (which is
held to be a symbol of Goddess Laksmi), has the famous Kaustubha gem hanging from His
neck; and His chest is covered by a garland of sylvan flowers of unfading splendour. (10) He
is adorned with a girdle (round His waist ) as well as with most precious rings, anklets and
bracelets etc., and looks charming with a smile that ever beams on His countenance
beautified with sleek, glossy, curly and dark tresses. (11) He is betraying His abundant grace
(on the devotees) by the play of His brows, the beauty of which is enhanced by His sportful
bright smiles and glances. The practicant should continue to gaze on this conceptual image
of the Lord till his mind gets fixed in meditation. (12) He should visualize with his mind one
by one all the limbs of Lord Visnu (the Wielder of amace) from His feet upwards to His smiling
countenance. Even as his reason gets purer and purer his mind will become steadier and
steadier, andin this way when one limb becomes clearly visible, he should leave it to visualize
the next. (13) Till one's mind gets fixed through devotion on the all-witnessing supreme Lord
of the universe as portrayed above, the practicant should with a concentrated mind meditate
on the grossest form of the Lord (as described in Discourse | above ) after he has finished
his daily devotions. (14)

काले च देशे च मनो न सज्जयेत् प्राणान् नियच्छेन्मनसा जितासु: eu!
मन: स्वबुद्ध्यामलया नियम्य aaa wi निनयेत् ame
आत्मानमात्मन्यवरुध्य धीरो लब्धोपशान्तिर्विरमेत कृत्यात्।१६॥
न यत्र कालोऽनिमिषां a: प्रभु: कुतो नु देवा जगतां य sft
न यत्र Ga न रजस्तमश्च न a विकारो न महान् प्रधानम् । १७॥
