Dis. 24 ] BOOK FIVE - 533.

PAK पि केत्तच्या त्व्या ज छ SKELTON SE VER SECESLE KS HEDEARSCEA HE ECHHAREH HA HOH HF EM MH NT eH ती AT शं

And actually fixing one's gaze on this very form of Lord Visnu, representing all the gods,
inthe evening from day to day, one should wait with a concentrated mind upon the same with
the following (prayer) silently:—"Hail to the Supreme Person, (manifesting Himself as) the
wheel of Time—the backbone of the luminaries —the Ruler of all the gods! (Thus) do we
meditate on Him.” (8) The form of Lord Visnu (the Ruler of all the gods), consisting of the
planets, lunar mansions and other stars, wipes out the sins of those who repeat the foregoing
prayer thrice (in the morning and evening and at noon) everyday. (Nay,) the sin committed
in the immediate past by him who bows to or even thinks of this form three times (a day)
disappears at once. (9)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse entitled " The disposition of the stellar sphere represented
in the form of a dolphin" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PERE
त्तज

अथ णोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIV
The position of Rahu etc., and the limits of the

heavenlike subterranean regions
श्रीशुक उवाच

अधस्तात्सवितुर्योजनायुते स्वर्भानुर्नक्षत्रवच्चरतीत्येके चोऽसावमरत्वं ग्रहत्वं चालभत भगवदनुकम्पया

स्वयमसुरापसद: Gena ह्यतदर्हस्तस्य aa जन्मकर्माणि चोपरिष्टाद्वक्ष्याम:। १1 यददस्तरणेर्मण्डलं

तद्व्यवधानकृद्वैरानुबन्ध: सूयांचन्द्रमसावभिधावति। २। तन्निशम्योभयत्रापि भगवता रक्षणाय प्रयुक्तं

[ननाभ af । mindy or स्थितो महर्तमा रि
आरादेव निवर्तते तदुपरागमिति वदन्ति लोका: । ३1

Sri Suka went on : Some people (well-versed in the Pauranika lore) declare that ten
thousand Yojanas below the sun (a heavenly body called) Rahu moves about like a lunar
mansion. The deity presiding over it, who was by birth a vile demon, having been born of (a
mother,) Simhika (by name), attained by the grace of the Lord immortality and the (exalted)
rank of a planet (thus, influencing the destiny of men), though unworthy of these. (The story)
of his birth and deeds, O dear son, we shall narrate later on (in Books, VI and VIII). (1) They
declare the sphere of the burning sun, that shines yonder, as ten thousand Yojanas, that of
the moon as twelve thousand and that of Rahu as thirteen thousand Yojanas in extent—(the
same Rahu) who assails the sun and the moon on the day when the two dwell together and
the day of the full moon (respectively), nursing a grudge against them ever since he
interposed himself between them (in the garb of a god to share the feast of nectar, which was
being doled out to the gods by the Lord Himself appearing in the form of a bewitching woman,
Mohini by name vide Discourse IX of Book VIll—and his identity was disclosed by the sun-
god and the moon-god). (2) Seeing the celebrated and favourite missile (discus) of the Lord,
Sudargana by name, placed by Him by the side of both the aforesaid (planets) for their
protection—on coming to know their (delicate) plight—and formidable by its splendour,
constantly revolving, he (Rahu) stands facing it for an hour or so (lit., 48 minutes), shaking
