Dis. 3] BOOK TEN 111
soit reese eee

ककक 4१३8 8%# 9 8789 र्श्वशं

frag न च wedi सम्यग् यतस्त्यक्तमुपाददत् पुमान् ।१८॥
त्वत्तोऽस्य जन्मस्थितिसंयमान् fat वदन्त्यनीहादगुणादविक्रियात्।
त्वयीश्वरे ब्रह्मणि नो feet त्वदाश्रवत्वादुपचर्यते गुणै: । १९1
स त्वं त्रिलोकस्थितये स्वमायया बिभर्षि a खलु वर्णमात्मन: ।
सर्गाय we रजसोपबृंहितं कृष्णं च al तमसा जनात्यये ।२०॥
- स्वमस्य wea fan रिरक्षिषुर्गृहेऽवतीर्णोऽसि ममाखिलेश्वर ।
रानन्यप्तज्ञाप्रुय्कोटियूथपेळ्ळिप्ता निहनिष्यसे चमू: । २१॥
अयं त्वसभ्यस्तव जन्म नौ गृहे श्रुत्वाग्रजांस्तेन्यवधीत् gar
a aaa ogee: समर्पिते श्रुत्वाधुनैवाभिसरत्युदायुध: 1221
Vasudeva prayed : You have been directly known (by me) to be (the same as) the
Supreme Person, existing beyond Prakrti (the material plane), nay, consisting of absolute
and conscious bliss, the witness of all minds. (13) Having evolved even as such (consisting
of truth, consciousness and bliss) at the beginning (of creation) this (universe), consisting of
the three Gunas, by Your (own), creative energy, You are conceived as having entereditafter
that, even though 85 matter of fact You have not enteredit. (14) (Just) as these elementary
principtes, (viz., the Mahat-tattva, Anankara and the five Tanmatras) appear to have entered
their evolutes (even though they do not really enter it), so is the case with You (who appear
to have entered the womb of Devaki even though You have not actually entered it).
Combining (under the direction of the Spirit) with their (sixteen) evolutes (viz., the five gross
elements and the ten Indriyas and the mind), the former actually bring forth the cosmic egg,
though possessing diverse properties and existing apart (from one another); and, having
duly evolved it, they appear as having entered it (even though they donot really do so). Their
entry into it is not possible due to their being already present in it (as its causes). (15-16) In
this way You are imagined as having entered Devaki's womb, though not having actually
enteredit. Though existing (as their cause) with the objects perceptible by the senses (whose
true nature can only be inferred through the perception of sense-objects),You are not
apprehended alongwith those sense-objects; (for) the distinction of inside and outside does
not exist in You, that comprise and indwell all, are all-pervading and real—because of Your
being unlimited. (How, then, can it be possible for You to enter anything?) (17) He who
concludes with regard to material objects perceptible by him that they are real as distinct from
their (own) self is ignorant. And since, when investigated into, such an object does not prove
to be anything but a (mere) display of words, a man acknowledging what has been disproved
is (certainly) a fool. (18) The wise declare the appearance, the continuance and the
destruction of this (universe), O Lord, (as proceeding) from You, who are desireless, beyond
the (three) Gunas and changeless. This is notincompatible in You, who are (at once) Branma
(the Absolute) and the (almighty) Lord. (As a matter of fact,) whatever is done by the Gunas
is ascribed to You because of Your being their ultimate ground. (19) As such (consisting of
truth, consciousness and bliss), of course, You assume (reveal) by Your creative will Your
pure (white) complexion (Visnu form consisting of Sattva) for the continuance of the three
worlds, Your red complexion (Brahma form), endowed with the principle of Rajas, for their
creation, and a dark complexion (Rudra form), evolved by (the principle of) Tamas for their
destruction. (20) Intending to protect this universe, O Lord, the Ruler of all, You have
descended in my house. You wiil (in course of time) extirpate (for the protection of the
righteous) armies led by numberless Asura chiefs passing under the name of Ksatriya
princes. (21) Hearing of (anticipating) Your birth in our house, this villain (of a Karnsa) actually
