Dis. 66] BOOK TEN 401
१3 २३०० ३२२ २ ७२२० १२०

` २०२७ २७२ 3 २७ वन्र शाक कजशषशशजैआ आआ #

with his tongue; his naked body threw out flames of fire. Flourishing a trident (in his hand),
he strode the earth with legs as tall as a palm tree. Making the earth tremble under his feet
and burning the cardinal points, he rushed towards Dwaraka, followed by spectress. (33-34)
At the sight of that Abhicara fire rushing towards them, the people of Dwaraka were all
frightened, even as the deer get frightened at the sight of a forest conflagration. (35) They
ran in consternation to the Lord, who was playing at dice in His court, and said, “ 0 Ruler of
the three worlds, protect us, O protect us, from the fire thatis about to consume the city.” (36)
Hearing of this distress of His people, and seeing (the cause of) their fear, Sri Krsna (the
protector of His devotees) laughed loudly and heartily and said, "Do not be afraid, | shall
protect you (from this danger).” (37)
सर्वस्यान्तर्बहि:साक्षी कृत्यां meat विभु: । विज्ञाय तद्विघातार्थं पार्श्वस्थं चक्रमादिशत् । ३८।
7 सूर्यकोटिप्रतिमं सुदर्शनं जाज्वल्यमानं प्रलयानलप्रभम्।
स्वतेजसा खे ककुभोऽथ रोदसी चक्रं मुकुन्दास्त्रमथाग्निमार्दयत् ae
कृत्यानल: प्रतिहत: स रथाङ्गपाणेरस्रौजसा स yy भग्नमुखो निवृत्त: |
वाराणसीं परिसमेत्य सुदक्षिणं तं afar समदहत् स्वकृतोऽभिचार: ।४०॥
as च विष्णोस्तदनुप्रविष्टुं वाराणसीं साट्ठसभालयापणाम्।
तु ॰ सकोशाहस्त्यश्वरथान्नशालाम् 1% 8
दग्ध्वा वाराणसीं सर्वां विष्णोश्चक्रं सुदर्शनम्। भूय: पार्श्वमुपातिष्ठत् कृष्णस्याक्लिष्टकर्मण: 1x21
Lord Sri Krsnais a witness of all that happens within and without all creatures. He at once
came to know that it was the Krtya (a malevolent force) of Lord Siva (released from Kasi).
He commanded His discus (Sudargana), that stood by His side, to nullify the Krtya. (38)
Brilliant like millions of suns, and flaming forth like the fire of universal destruction, the discus
Sudargana, the (favourite) missile of the Lord, lighted up heaven and earth as well as the
intervening region and the (four) quarters with its lustre and forthwith subduéd the Abhicara
fire. (39) Repulsed by the force of StiKrsna’s weapon, the magic fire known by the name of
Krtya had its force blunted and, turning back, returned to Kasi and burnt up Sudaksina and
his priests, by whom it had been released.(40) Following the Krtya, Sudargana, the discus
of Sri Krsna, entered Kasi and, reducing the whole city to ashes alongwith its high towers,
assembly halls, houses, market-places, big gates, attics, granaries, treasuries, the stalls for
elephants, horses and chariots and dining halls, returned to Dwaraka and stood once more
by the side of Sti Krsna, who did everything as a matter of sport. (41-42)

a wenn उत्तमश्लोकविक्रमम्।समाहितो वा spd, सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यत्ते ॥४३॥
The man who hears attentively, or relates, the story of this exploit of the glorious Lord (Sri
Krsna) is completely rid of all sins. (43)

Thus ends the sixty-sixth discourse entitled “ Paundraka and others killed (by $17 Krsna)",
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Steet
evi Sees
