750 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 4

LHHESHEHHEALOKAL EERE LEE HEATER ELECEREELCEHLLEEE ES EECHE LETH LEECH HEE RRECH REE

taking His seat on (the back of) Garuda (the king of birds), Lord Sri Hari (who has a lotus
sprung from His navel) withdrew to His transcendent realm (Vaikuntha), His feat (viz., the
deliverance of the elephant) being celebrated by Gandharvas, Siddhas and gods. (13) The
glory of Sri Krsna (Lord Sri Hari), O great king, has (thus) been narrated to you by me in the
form of the aforementioned deliverance of the king of elephants, (the story of) which leads
to heaven, is conducive to renown, wipes out the impurities of the Kali age and eliminates
(the possibility of) bad dreams in the case of those who listen to this story. O chief of the
Kurus ! (14) Rising (early) in the morning, and getting purified, members of the twice-born
classes, seeking (their own) welfare, duly recite this story for neutralizing (the evil effects of)
a bad dream and so on. (15) full of joy, the all-pervading Sri Hari, who embodies all created
beings, told the (quondam) king of elephants as follows, O jewel of the Kurus, all living beings

(present there) listening. (16)
ये मां त्वां च ase ग्रिरिंक्ताकाननम्।वेन्रकौचकबेश्ला॰ गुल्पानि सुरपादपान् 1 2191
शृङ्गाणीमानि धिष्ण्यानि ब्रह्मणो मे शिवस्य ai क्षीरोदं मे प्रियं धाम श्वेतद्वीपं च भास्वरम् । १८|॥
श्रीवत्सं कौस्तुभं मालां गदां कौमोदकीं मम । सुदर्शनं पाञ्चजन्यं सुपर्णं पतगेश्वरम् । १९।
शेषं च मत्कलां gent श्रियं देवीं मदाश्रयाम्। ब्रह्माणं नारदमृषिं भवं प्रह्रादमेव च ।२०॥
मत्स्यकूर्मवराहाद्यैरवतारे: कृतानि मे। कर्माण्यनन्तपुण्यानि qi सोमं हुताशनम् । २१
प्रणवं सत्यमव्यक्तं गोविप्रान् धर्ममव्ययम्। दाक्षायणीर्धर्मपत्नी: सोमकरश्यपयोरपि 1221
गङ्गां सरस्वतीं नन्दां कालिन्दीं सितवारणम्। ya ब्रह्मऋषीन्सप्त पुण्यङ्लोकांश्च मानवान् । २३।
उत्थायापररात्रान्ते प्रयता: सुसमाहिता: | स्मरन्ति मम रूपाणि मुच्यन्ते ह्येनसोऽखिलात् । २४॥
aoa स्तुवन्त्यनेनाङ्ग प्रतिबुध्य fered तेषां प्राणात्यये चाहं ददामि विमलां मतिम् । २५॥

The Lord said: Rising at the close of the third watch of the night (that immediately
following midnight), nay purified and fully composed (in mind), they who remember Me and
yourself as well as this lake, the yonder mountain (TrikUta) with (its) caves and the forest
(clothing it), the clusters of canes and bamboos, (both) of the hollow and solid types, the
celestial trees (comprised in this forest), these (three) peaks (of the Triktta mountain), the
realms of Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva and Myself, the ocean of milk and the resplendent
(transcendent) Swetadwipa, each being My favourite abode, Srivatsa (the curl of hair on My
breast), the Kaustubha gem (on my bosom) as well as My garland of sylvan flowers or My
necklace of pearls (known by the name of Vaijayanti), My mace, Kaumodaki, (My discus)
Sudarsana, (My conch) Paficajanya, (My mount) Garuda (possessed of beautiful wings), the
king of birds, Sesa (the serpent-god), who is My subtle emanation, Goddess Sri (Laksmi,
the goddess presiding over beauty and prosperity), who has Her abode in Me (on My very
bosom), Brahma (the creator), the sage Narada, Lord Siva (the Source of prosperity) as well
as (My eminent devotee) Prahrada, the (numerous) deeds performed through My (various)
descents such as the (divine) Fish, Tortoise and Boar, (the very stories of) which yield an
inexhaustible store of merit (to the listeners), the sun-god, the moon-god, the god of fire (the
consumer of oblations), Pranava (the mystical syllable OM), truth, the Unmanifest (primor-
dial Matter), the cow and the Brahmanas, the immortal religion (the cult of devotion to the
Lord), the daughters of Daksa who are the wives of Dharma (the god of piety) as well as of
the moon-god and Kasyapa, the (rivers) Ganga, Saraswati, Nanda(Alakananda) and Kalindi
(Yamuna), the white elephant (Airavata, the mount of Indra, the lord of paradise), (My
immortal devotee) Dhruva, the seven Brahmana sages and men of sacred renown (such as
Nala, Yudhisthira and Janaka), (that are all) My (glorious) manifestations, are actually freed
