722 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 12

PERT INCERTE LATA HOLLER ERTAREORORAALERR आण ^ ecateeseseeews oS

देवता मुनय: सिद्धा: पितरो मनवो नृपा: । यच्छन्तिकामान्गृणत: शृण्वतो यस्य कीर्तनात् । ६१॥
ऋचो यजूंषि सामानि द्विजोऽधीत्यानुविन्दते 1 मधुकुल्या घृतकुल्या: पय:कुल्याश्च तत्फलम् । ६२ |
पुराणसंहितामेतामधीत्य प्रयतो द्विज: । प्रोक्तं भगवता GG तत्पदं परमं व्रजेत् । ६३।
विप्रोऽधीत्याप्नुयात् प्रज्ञां राजन्योदधिमेखलाम् deat निधिपतित्वं च Ys: IA पातकात् । ६४॥

In this way has been recounted to you, 0 Brahmana sages, the glory—that is capable of
uprooting all evil—of Lord Vasudeva, whose great exploits are worth narrating. (57) He who
repeats this Purana (to others) everyday with an undivided mind (say,) for three hours or (for
that matter even) for a second and (in the same way) he who listens to it repeatedly with
reverence purifies his very soul. (58) Listening to it on the twelfth or eleventh day of either
fortnight of a lunar month, one enjoys a longlife; while he who reads it devoutly while remaining
without food is thereby rid of (all) sin. (69) Reading this compilation with a calm and collected
mind at Puskara, Mathura or Dwaraka while abstaining from food, one is rid of fear (of
rebirth). (60) (Pleased) as a result of chanting this Purana, gods, sages, Siddhas,manes,
Manus andkings confer desired boons on the man repeating or listening to it. (61) A Brahmana
who reads this Purana attains the same reward which he gets by studying (all the three Vedas,)
Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda, viz., streams of honey, streams of ghee and streams of
milk (i.e., all kinds of blessings). (62) Having devoutly studied this collection of verses in the
form of a Purana, a member of the twice-born classes attains to that highest goal which has
as a matter of fact been extolled by the Lord (on many an occasion in the past). (63) Having
studied this Purana a Brahmana bids fair to attain true insight (into the truth); a Ksatriya,
sovereignty over the (whole) earth with the oceans for its girdle; a Vaisya, the position of
Kubera (the lord of treasures); while a Stdra is absolved from (all) sins. (64)

कलिमलसंहतिकालनोऽखिलेशो हरिरितरत्र न ‘at ह्यभीक्ष्णम् ।
इह तुं पुनर्भगवानदोषमूर्ति परिपठितोऽनुपदं कथाप्रसङ्घै: ।६५॥
तमहमजमनन्तमात्मतत्त्वं जगदुदयस्थितिसंयमात्मशक्तिम् |
ह्युपतिभिरजशक्रशङ्काराद्यैर्दुरवसितस्तवमच्युतं नतोऽस्मि । ६६1
उपचितनवदक्तिभि: स्व आत्मन्युपरचितस्थिरजङ्घमालयाय |
भगवत उपलब्धिमात्रधाम्ने सुरऋॠषभाय नम: सनातनाय 1६७1

Sri Hari, the Ruler of all, whois capable of destroying the (entire) mass of impurities of the
Kali age, is not certainly sung elsewhere so frequently. In this work, however, that Lord
appearing in all forms stands celebrated at every step through relevant episodes. (65) | bow
to that birthless and infinite Lord Visnu, the (true) principle of consciousness, whose own
potencies (in the form of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas) are responsible for the appearance,
continuance and dissolution of the universe and whose glorification is hardly known (even) to
the lords of spheres like Brahma (the birthless creator), Indra and Lord Siva ! (66) Hail to the
etemal Lord, the foremost of (all) the gods, whose true nature consists of absolute consciousness
and who has evolved in His own Self—through the instrumentality of His nine potencies (in the

shape of Prakrti, Purusa, the Mahat-tattva, Ahankara and the five Tanmatras), strengthened
by Himself—an abode (for Himself) in the form of the inanimate and animate creation. (67)

ee ।
व्यतनुत कृपया यस्तत्त्वदीपं पुराणं तमखिलवृजिनघ्नं व्याससूनुं नतोऽस्मि । ६८॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धे द्वादशस्कन्धार्थनिरूपणं नाम द्वादशोऽध्याय: 1221

| bow to the (celebrated) sage Suka the son of Vyasa, whose mind is (ever) full in
