Dis. 12] ` BOOK FOUR 349

SRICRIRIN toi setting tn iyininiee te fice tino toh fringe hei oe in et een tee tote een an eee
ज्र्त्त

complaisant to all living beings and who look upon the devotees of the immortal Lord as their
only kinsmen easily ascend to that Abode of the immortal Lord. (37)
गम्भीरवेगोऽनिमिषं ज्योतिषां चक्रमाहितम्। यस्मिन् भ्रमति कौरव्य मेढ्यामिव गवां गण: । ३९॥
महिमानं facta नारदो भगवानृषि: | आतोद्यं वितुदन्ङ्लोकान्सत्रेऽगायत्प्रचेतसाम् ।४०॥

In this way Dhruva, son of Uttanapada, who solely depended on Lord Sri Krsna, shone
as a gem of the purest ray serene, forming the crown of the three worlds. (38) Fastened to
this realm, the stellar sphere vigilantly revolves roundit, O Vidura (descendant of Kuru), even
as the oxen (employed in trampling corn) revolve round the post in the middle of a threshing-
floor with great speed, remaining attached to that post. (39) Witnessing his glory, the
worshipful sage Narada chanted the following (three) verses in the sacrificial session called
by the Pracetas, playing upon his (famous) lute. (40)

ARG उवाच
OG: पतिदेवतायास्तप:प्रभावस्य सुतस्य aT गतिम्।
दृष्टाभ्युपायानपि वेदवादिनो नैवाधिगन्तुं प्रभवन्ति किं Far ive

Narada said ; Even Brahmana sages (the expositors of the Vedas), though knowing
the means, fail to attain the consummation reached as a result of his austere penance
by the son of Suniti, who was so devoted to her husband. How, then, can rulers of men
attain to that state ? (41) A child of five years, he retired to the woods with an aching heart,
pierced by the shaft-like words of his stepmother, and, doing my bidding, won (the favour
of) the Lord, who, though unconquered (by others) is overcome by the virtues of His
devotees. (42) Can anyone who is born of Ksatriya parents on this earth aspire to attain
on his analogy even in many successive years the exalted state won by Dhruva—a state
which he attained to even as a child of five to six years in the course of a few days
by propitiating Lord Visnu ? (43)

एतत्तेऽभिहितं सर्वं यत्पृष्टोऽहमिह त्वया । ध्रुवस्योद्दामयशसश्चरितं सम्मतं सताम्।४४।
धन्यं यदास्यमायुष्यं पुण्यं we महत्। स्वर्ग्य ध्रौव्यं सोमनस्यं प्रशस्यमघमर्षणम् ।४५॥
श्रुत्वैतच्छ्रद्धयाभीक्ष्णमच्युतप्रियचेष्टितम् । भवेद्धक्तिर्भगवति वययास्यात्केशसंक्षय: ।४६॥
महत्त्वमिच्छतां तीर्थं श्रोतु: शीलादयो गुणा: । aa तेजस्तदिच्छूनां मानो aa मनस्विनाम् ive
प्रयत: कीर्तयेत्प्रात॥ समवाये द्विजन्मनाम्। ad च पुण्यर्लोकस्य ध्रुवस्य चरितं महत् ।४८।
पौर्णमास्यां सिनीवाल्वां gesat श्रवणेऽथवा । दिनक्षये व्यतीपाते सङ्क्रमेऽर्कदिनेऽपि वा ।४९॥
श्रावयेच्छ्रद्दधानानां तीर्थपादपदाश्रय: | नेच्छंस्तत्रात्मनाऽऽत्मानं सन्तुष्ट इति सिध्यति । ५०॥
ज्ञानमज्ञाततत्त्वाय यो दद्यात्सत्पथेऽमृतम्। कृपालोर्दीननाथस्य देवास्तस्यानुगृह्णते । ५१॥

इदं मया तेऽभिहितं कुरूद्वह ध्रुवस्य विख्यातविशुद्धकर्मण: |

हित्वार्भक: क्रीडनकानि mae च विष्णुं ser यो जगाम ।५२॥
