474 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 84

SOOO क कव्या न क OE EES HOON NSO TEEN ल्क ग OPER NNT REE BE EEO ET Ene क २ ७

and clasping their feet, he addressed them with great humility. (28)
वसुदेव उवाच
नमो व: सर्वदेवेभ्य ama: श्रोतुमर्हथ । कर्मणा कर्मनिर्हारो यथा स्यान्नस्तदुच्यताम् । २९॥
Vasudeva submitted : Sages, in you reside all the gods,” | offer my salutations to you.
Kindly listen to me. (Pray) tell us by what sort of activity one may be able to rid oneself of all

Karma and (the desire for Karma). (29)
ARG उवाच

नाति चित्रमिदे विप्रा बमुदैवो ayaa | PUT मत्वार्भकं यन्न: घृच्छति a आत्मन: 1301

सन्निकर्षो हि | wealaerecorerom mg हित्वा यथान्याम्भस्तत्रत्यो याति Bea ।३१॥

Tey: कालेन लयोत्पत्त्यादिनास्य वै । स्वतोऽन्यस्माच्च गुणतो न कुतश्चन रिष्यति 321

तं क्लेशकर्मपरिपाकगुणप्रवाहैरव्याहतानुभवमीश्वरमद्दितीयम् |
प्राणादिभि: स्वविभवैरुपगूढमन्यो मन्येत सूर्यमिव मेघहिमोपरागै: 1331
Devarsi Narada replied ; O sages, it is no great wonder that regarding Sri Krsna as his

child, Vasudeva should inquire of us with a view to his enlightenment, the road to his spiritual
welfare. (30) For human beings are generally prone to underrate those who are near them
We find persons living on the banks of the Ganga leaving the Ganga water and resorting to
other sacred waters for their purification. (31) Sri Krsna's self-awareness is never obscured
by the processes of creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe, which are carried
out by Time. It does not suffer diminution on any account (either) by itself or through any
external cause, or through the action of the Gunas. (32) His wisdom is never obscured by the
(five) afflictions (in the shape of ignorance, egotism, attraction, repulsion and fear of death),
nor by (virtuous and sinful) Karmas, nor by their fruits (in the form of joy and sorrow), nor again
by the ebb and flow of Sattvika (and) the (other) Gunas. He is the one Lord, without a second.
When He veils Himself under His own potencies, the vital airs etc., ignorant people consider
Him as veiled, even as when the vision gets obstructed by clouds, mist and eclipse, etc.,
people regard the sun as screened by them. (33)

अथोचुर्मुनयो राजन्नाभाष्यानकदुन्दुभिम् । सर्वेषां oad राज्ञां तथैवाच्युतरामयो: । ३४॥
कर्मणा कर्मनिर्हार एष साधु निरूपित: । यच्छृद्धया aig विष्णुं सर्वयज्ञेश्चरं मखै: ।३५॥
चिन्तस्योपशमोऽयं वै कविभि: दास्त्रचक्षुषा । दर्शित: सुगमो योगो धर्मश्चात्प्मुदावह: 1361
अयं स्वस्त्ययन: पन्था द्विजातेर्गृहमेधिन: । यच्छ्द्धयाऽऽप्तवित्तेन Ysa पूरुष: 1301
वित्तैषणां यज्ञदानैर्गृहैर्दारसुतैषणाम् । आत्मलोकैषणां देव area विसृजेद् बुध: 1
aa त्यक्तैषणा: ad ययुर्धीरास्तपोवनम् । ३८॥
ॠणैस्वरिभिर्दविजो जातो देवर्षिपितॄणां प्रभो । यज्ञाध्ययनपुत्रैस्तान्यनिस्तीर्य त्यजन् पतेत् ।३९॥
त्वं त्वद्य मुक्तो द्वाभ्यां a ऋषिपित्रोर्महामते । यज्ञैर्देवर्णमुन्मुच्य निर्ऋणोऽशारणो भव ।४०॥
वसुदेव भवान् नूनं भक्त्या परमया हरिम्। जगतामीश्वरं ord: स ae वां पुत्रतां गत: ।४१॥
Addressing Vasudeva, (as follows) within the hearing of Sn Krsna, Balarama and the
kings (present there), Oking, the sages then said: (34) The best way of neutralizing pastacts

and wiping out the desire for future action through action itself is to propitiate, with (due)
reverence, Visnu, the Lord of all sacrifices, through sacrifices. (35) Perceiving through the

“The Srut says. यावतीर्वै देवतास्ता: wal वेदविदि ब्राह्मणे वसन्ति।
