Dis. 14] BOOK FOUR yo

REHOME THERA HEE LH HELEN EA HSK HRE RAV EKH LAER HTTEEH AHHH HARORANACERRA OHA HH HORE

they returned to the city and bowing to the sages assembled (there), told them with tears in
their eyes, O Vidura (scion of Puru), about the disappearance of their master. (49)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Four of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

= २2 Boat CURT ES
PISS Siiesrs

अथ चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIV

The story of king Vena
भृग्वादयस्ते मुनचो लोकानां क्षेमदर्शिन: । गोप्तर्यसति a नॄणां cera: पशुसाप्यताम् । १ ।
an मातरमाहूय सुनीथां ae: । प्रकृत्यसम्मतं वेनमभ्यषिञ्चन् पति भुव: । २ ।
श्रुत्वा Fed वेनमत्युग्रशासनम्।निलिल्युर्दस्यव: wa: adam इवाखव: । ३ |
a आरूढनृपस्थान उन्नद्धोऽष्टविभूतिभि: | अवमेने महाभागान् स्तब्ध: सम्भावित: स्वत: । ४ |
एवं very उत्सिक्तो निरङ्कुशा ga द्विप: । पर्यटन् रथमास्थाय कम्पयन्निव रोदसी । ५ |
न यष्टव्यं न दातव्यं न होतव्यं द्विजा: क्वचित्।इति न्यवारयद्धर्मं भेरीघोषेण सर्वश: । ६ ।
Maitreya continued : The aforesaid sages, Bhrgu and others, solicitous as they were
for the welfare of the people, saw that in the absence of a protector (in the form of a ruler)
men were being reduced to the level of beasts. (1) Sending for queen Sunitha, the mother
of Vena, O valiant Vidura, the sages (who were all expounders of the Vedas) crowned
Vena as the sovereign of the globe, even though he was not approved of by the
ministers.(2) Hearing that Vena, who ruled with an iron hand, had ascended the throne,
thieves and dacoits soon hid themselves like rats afraid of a snake. (3) Arrogant and self-
conceited as he was by nature, he was puffed up with pride now that he had attained to
the royal state and acquired the power and affluence of the eight protectors of the world,
and despised (even) holy men. (4) Thus blinded with the intoxication of power and proud
like an elephant not governed by a goad, he mounted achariot and touring (all over his vast
dominion) and shaking heaven and earth as it were, banned all religious performances,
proclaiming by beat of drum as follows; "You shall never perform sacrifices nor bestow gifts
nor pour oblations into the sacred fire under any circumstance, O members of the twice-
born classes !" (5-6)

वेनस्यावेक्ष्य मुनयो दुर्वृत्तस्य विचेष्टितम्। विमृश्य लोकव्यसनं कृपयोचु: स्म सत्रिण: । |
अहो उभवत: WA लोकस्य व्यसनं महत्। दारुण्युभयतो dq ga तस्करपालयो: । ८ ।
अराजकभ्यादेष कृतो राजातदर्हण: | ततोऽप्यासीद्भयं त्वद्य कथं स्यात्स्वस्ति देहिनाम् । ९ ।
sea casa: पोषकस्याप्यनर्थभृत्। aa: veda we: सुनीथागर्भसम्भव: । १०।
निरूपित: प्रजापाल: स जिघांसति व प्रजा: | तथापि सान्त्वयेमामुं नास्मांस्तत्पातकं स्पृशोत् । ११।
तद्बिद्वद्भिरसद्वृत्तो वेनोऽस्माभि: कृतो Fo: । सान्तवितो यदि नो ard न ग्रहीष्यत्यधर्मकृत् । १२।
