458 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

SRR Rie RTH HANES LOOSE LEH SSCS T HEHEHE CHEER OHA EAE ECA कीं त्ती क क्त कक HEE

into the sacred fire at a sacrifice. (23) It is by the Brahmana that My glorious and eternal body
(in the form of the Vedas) has been maintained on earth and it is in him that the most
sanctifying quality of Sattva, control of the mind and the senses, truthfulness and compassion,
asceticism, endurance and wisdom are found. (24) The Brahmanas who are rich in devotion
to Me, though destitute of worldly possessions, have nothing to seek even from Me, the
Lord possessed of infinite power and higher than the highest (Brahma and others) and the
Bestower of heavenly bliss and final beatitude ! What can they have to do with anything

else? (25) ॥
सर्वाणि मद्धिष्णयतया भवद्धिश्चराणि भूतानि aa ध्रुवाणि।
सम्भावितव्यानि we we at विविक्तदृग्भिस्तदुहार्हणं मे।२६॥
`मनोवचोदृक्करणेहितस्य साक्षात्कृतं मे परिबर्हणं हि।
fa पुमान् येन महाविमोहात् कृतान्तपाशान्न विमोक्तुमीशेत्। 201
With a pure (ungrudging) mind all living beings, mobile (animate) as well as immobile
(inanimate), My sons, ought to be respected by you at every step as (so many) abodes
of Mine; that alone will be My true worship at your hands. (26) My propitiation is the ( only)
reward of the activities of the mind, tongue, eyes and the other Indriyas. For, without

propitiating Me a man cannot hope to escape from the greatly confounding noose of
Death. (27)

जडान्धमूकबधिरपिशाचोन्मादकवदवधूतवेषोऽभिभाष्यमाणोऽपि जनानां गृहीतमौनव्रतस्तूष्णीं बभूव। २९॥
aa तत्र पुरग्रामाकरखेटवाटखर्वटशिबिरव्रजघोषसार्थगिरिवनाश्रमादिष्वनुपथमवनिचरापसदै: परिभूयमानो

विखण्डितमना: पृथिवीमेकचर: परिवभ्राम। ३० अतिसुकुमारकरचरणोर:स्थलविपुलबाह्वंसगल-
वदनाद्यवयवविन्यास: प्रकृतिसुन्दरस्वभावहाससुमुखो नवनलिनदलायमानशिशिरतारारुणाय-
far: sf + १ >. रि fi x ~ पु रि ° iz
इवादृश्यत 1 221
Sri Suka continued : Having thus admonished his sons, who were themselves
(thoroughly) disciplined, for the guidance of the world, the most glorious Lord Rsabha, their
greatest friend (and well-wisher) installed on the throne the eldest of His hundred sons,
Bharata—who was not only a great devotee of the Lord but was devoted to His servants as
well—for the protection of the earth (His kingdom). (Then) in order to exemplify (in Himself)
the mode of life of recluses, characterized by Devotion, Self-Realization and aversion for the
pleasures of sense, and followed by great ascetics given to self-control and retired from
(worldly) activity, He Himself renounced even at home everything except His body, which
was the only possession left with Him, and, having absorbed the sacrificial fires into Himself,
and taking to the life of a recluse, departed from Brahmavarta as if mad, with dishevelled hair
and having no covering on His body except the sky. (28) Behaving like a stupid, blind, dumb,
deaf or madman or (even like) a goblin, he put on the appearance of one who had lost all
