232 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21.

BACH EAH HARON NH HOH HERE HHS HKHK ERE SEAT E WL LH MOU SHE KHER ON FHSS HOY HH ee

taking his daughter (Devahiati) along with him and journeying all over the globe, reached
the aforementioned hermitage of the sage (Kardama)—who had just completed his vow
(of austerity)—on the very day foretold by the Lord, O Vidura. (36-37) The holy
Bindusarovara—which overflowed with the water of the river Saraswati and was resorted
to by hosts of eminent sages, and whose water was not only wholesome but also sweet
as nectar—was so-called because drops of tears had fallen thereon from the eyes of the
Lord, overwhelmed as he was by extreme compassion directed towards the sage, who had
sought His protection. (38-39) The lake was richin fruits and flowers ofallseasons inasmuch
as itwas surrounded by clusters of sacred trees and creepers affording shelter to holy beasts
and birds that uttered various cries, and was adorned with rows of forest trees. (40) It
resounded with the notes of overjoyed birds and was the scene of the humming ofintoxicated
bees; merry, peacocks proudly danced (in the forest surrounding the lake) and merry
cuckoos called one another (by their sweet notes).(41) The lake was hemmed round by
Kadamba, Campaka, Asoka, Karanja, Bakula, Asana, Kunda, Mandara, Kutaja and young
mango trees, and echoed with the pleasing notes of Karandavas (a species of duck), Plavas,
swans, ospreys, water-fowls, cranes, Cakrawakas and Cakoras. (42-43) And itwas infested
with deer, boars, porcupines, Gayals (a species of wild animals closely resembling the cow),
elephants, baboons, lions, monkeys, mongooses and musk-deer.(44)

sera तत्तीर्थवरमादिराज: सहात्मज:। ददर्शं मुनिमासीनं तस्मिन् हुतहुताशानम् xu I
frat वरपुषा तपस्युग्रयुजा चिरम् । नातिक्षामं भगवत: स्निग्धापाङ्गावलोकनात् |
तद्व्याहृतामृतकलापीयूषश्रवणेन TSE |
wR wider wees चीरवाससम्।उपसंथ्रित्य मलिनं यथार्हणमसंस्कृतम् ।॥४७]
aged Fa wd पुर: । सपर्यया पर्यगृह्णात्प्रतिनन्द्यानुरूपया 1४८1
Entering that most sacred spot with his daughter (Devahiti) and going near the sage, the
first monarch (Swayambhuva Manu) saw him sitting there (in his hermitage), having
propitiated the sacred fire (by pouring oblations into it). He shone most brilliant with his body,
which, though engaged in austere penance for a long time, was not much emaciated
because the Lord had cast His affectionate glance at him and he had also quaffed with his
ears the nectar flowing from the moon-like words of the Lord. The sage was of high stature,
had eyes big as the petals of a lotus, wore matted locks (on his head), was clad in rags and
looked untidy like an unpolished gem. (45—47) Seeing the monarch come to his hermitage

and bowing before him the sage greeted him (with benedictions) and received him with due
honour. (48)

गृहीतार्हणमासीनं aad प्रीणयन्मुनि: 1 स्मरन् भगवदादेशमित्याह smart गिरा 1४९1
नूनं चङ्क्रमणं देव wal संरक्षणाय a1 वधाय चासतां aed हरे: शक्तिर्हि पालिनी uo!
योऽर्केन्द्वम्नीन्द्रवायूनां यमधर्मप्रचेतसाम् | रूपाणि स्थान आधत्से A RTT ते नम: 1421
न यदा रथमास्थाय sa मणिगणार्पितम्। विस्फूर्जच्चण्डकोदण्डो रथेन त्रासयन्नघान् 1G?!
स्वसैन्यचरणक्षुण्णं वेपयन्मण्डलं भुव:। विकर्षन् बृहतीं सेनां पर्यटस्यंशुमानिव । ५३1
awa सेतव: सर्वे वर्णांश्रमनिबन्धना: | भगवद्रचिता tem भिद्येरन् बत दस्युभि: 14x!
seg समेधेत लोलुपैर्व्यङ्कुगैर्नृभि: । शयाने त्वयि लोकोऽयं दस्युग्रस्तो विनङ्म्यति 1५५1
अथापि ges त्वां ah यदर्थं त्वमिहागत:। तद्वयं निर्व्यलीकेन प्रतिपद्यामहे हृदा GE I

When the king had sat down calm and collected after receiving the sage's attentions, the
