Dis. 5 J BOOK EIGHT 753

जौत्री न्विन्र HOLE HEH REA EEE OH ET ANH E HEH BR NAR HR RO RH ओ PR RRR OR Rs HH BO

समाहितेन मनसा संस्मरन्पुरुषं परम्।उवाचोत्फुल्लवदनो देवान्स भगवान्पर: 1201

अहं भवो यूयमथोऽसुरादयो मनुष्यतिर्यरद्गुमघर्मजातय: |

यस्यावतारांशकलाविसर्जिता wm सर्वे a तमव्ययम्।1२१॥

न यस्य amt न च रक्षणीयो नोपेक्षणीयादरणीयपक्ष: |

अथापि सर्गस्थितिसंयमार्थं धत्ते रज:सत्त्वतमांसि काले ।२२॥

-अयं च तस्य स्थितिपालनक्षण: oa जुषाणस्य wa देहिनाम् ।

तस्माद् AAA: WOT जगद्गुरुं स्वानां स नो धास्यति शां सुरप्रिय: 1231

Sri Suka continued : When, pressed hard on the field of battle with sharp-edged
weapons, the gods fell dead in large numbers and did not rise again, and when as a result
of the imprecation pronounced by the sage Durvasa’, O ruler of men, (all) the three worlds.
(viz., earth, heaven and the intermediate region) along with Indra (their lord) were divested
of their splendour, (all) sacrificial and other (sacred) performances disappeared (fell into
desuetude). (15-16) Observing this (state of things), the great Indra (the lord of paradise),
Varuna (the god presiding over water and the western quarter) and other hosts of gods,
though deliberating (among themselves) through (mutual) consultations, did not arrive by
themselves at any definite conclusion (regarding the course of action to be followed by
them). (17) Thereupon they all went to the court of Brahma (the creator) on the summit of
Mount Meru and submissively made everything fully known to that supreme ruler.(18)
Seeing Indra, Vayu (the wind-god) and others destitute of (all) strength and shorn of
splendour, the worlds devoid of auspiciousness as it were, and the demons full of strength
and splendour unlike the gods, the all-powerful Brahma began contemplating on the
supreme Person with a fully concentrated mind. With a cheerful countenance that supreme
lord (Brahma) spoke to the gods (as follows): (19-20) "Lord Siva (the Source of the universe),
myself, you (gods) as well as the demons and other (species of ethereal) beings, human
beings and animals, the vegetable kingdom and the sweat-born creatures (bugs and so on)
have (all) been evolved (either) by His (very first) manifestation (the Purusa or the cosmic
Being) or by a fraction of the latter (viz., myself) or (lastly) by my own rays (Marici and the
other lords of creation). Let us all (therefore) seek refuge in that immortal Being. (21) There
is none deserving of death or protection at His hands and no side worthy of neglect or respect
in His eyes; yet, for the purposes of creation, continuance and dissolution of the universe,
He severally assumes at the proper time the qualities of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas.(22) And
the presentis the time for maintaining the equilibrium (proper functioning) of the universe on
the part of the Lord, who is embracing (at present) the quality of Sattva for the welfare of
embodied souls. We, therefore, seek shelter in the (said) preceptor of the universe. The
beloved of the gods, He will ensure the well-being of us, His own people. (23)
श्रीरुक उवाच

इत्याभाष्य सुरान्वेधा: सह देवैररिंदम। अजितस्य पदं साक्षाजगाम तमस: परम् ।२४॥
तत्रादृष्टस्वरूपाय श्रुतपूर्वाय बै विभो । स्तुतिमब्रूत दॆवीभिर्गीर्भिस्त्ववहितेन्द्रिय: । २५।

Sri Suka went on ; Having thus addressed the gods, 0 chastiser of foes, the creator

* The sage Durvasa was once returning from Vaikuntha (the divine realm of Lord Visnu). He wore on his bosom a wreath
of flowers bestowed on him by the Lord as a token of His pleasure. On the way he met Indra riding his elephant, Airavata. The
sage, in his tum, gifted the garland to Indra, who in his pride disdainfully threw it on the head of the elephant and the latter
playfully tore it from its head and trampled it under foot. At this the sage grew indignant and pronounced the curse that Indra
as well as the three worlds ruled over by him would soon be divested of their splendour.
