400 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 66

त्तचि वित्र AEE eRERSAAAERER SCHERRER CERSSEERESEESE fetrteteeestsa cere eek

do so today, if | avoided a clash with you.” (20) Reproaching him thus, Sri Krsna
shattered the chariot of Paundraka with His sharp arrows and lopped off his head with
His discus, (even) as Indra would knock down wings of a mountain with his thunderbolt. (21)
Sri Krsna likewise severed the head of the king of Kasi from his body with His arrows
and caused it to (fly and) fall into the city of Kasi even as the wind would carry away
a lotus-bud. (22) Thus putting an end to (both) Paundraka and his ally (the king of Kasi),
who had been nursing enmity towards Him, Lord Sri Krsna returned to Dwaraka, the
Siddhas singing His stories, sweet as nectar. (23) Pariksit, Paundraka ever used to
think intensely of the Lord. All the ties of his Karma were cut asunder by this; and as
he (constantly) remembered the Lord's Form, when imitating Him, he attained the same
Form as His (after death). (24)
fe पतितमालोक्य राजद्वारे सकुण्डलम् | किमिदं कस्य वा वक्त्रमिति संशिश्यिरेजना:। RS |
us: काशिपतेर्जजात्वा महिष्य: पुत्रबान्धवा: । पौराश्च ह्य इता राजन् नाथ नाथेति प्रारुदन्। २६।
सुदक्षिणस्तस्य सुत: कृत्वा संस्थाविधिं पितु: । निहत्य पितृहन्तारं यास्याम्यपचितिं पितु:। २७॥
इत्यात्मनाभिसन्धाय सोपाध्यायो महेश्वरम् | सुदक्षिणोऽर्चयामास परमेण समाधिना। २८॥
प्रीतोऽविमुक्ते भगवांस्तस्मै वरमदाद् va: i पितृहन्तृवधोपायं स वव्रे वरमीप्सितम्। २९1
दक्षिणाग्निं परिचर ब्राह्मणै: सममृत्विजम् । अभिचारविधानेन स चाग्नि: प्रमथैर्वृत: | Bo |
साधयिष्यति सङ्कुल्पमब्रह्मण्ये प्रयोजित: | इत्यादिष्टस्तथा चक्रे कृष्णायाभिचरन् द्रती। ३१॥
ततोऽग्निरुत्थित कुण्डान्मूर्तिमानतिभीषण: । तप्तताम्रशिखाश्मश्रुरङ्गारोद्गारिलोचन: 1321
दंष्टोग्रभ्रुकुटीदण्डकठोरास्य: स्वजिह्वया । आलिहन् सृक्किणी नग्नो विधुन्वंस्तिशिखं ज्वलन्। 83 |
पद्भ्यां तालप्रमाणाभ्यां कम्पयन्नवनीतलम् | सोऽभ्यधावद् वृतो Yeates प्रदहन् दिश: । ३४॥
`तमाभिचारदहनमायान्तं द्वारकौकस: | विलोक्य wag: सर्वे वनदाहे मृगा यथा। ३५॥
aa: सभायां क्रीडन्तं भगवन्तं भयातुरा: late त्राहि त्रिलोकेश वह्ने: प्रदहत: पुरम्। ३६॥
श्रुत्वा तज्जनवैक्लव्यं दृष्ट्वा स्वानां च साध्वसम् | शरण्य: सम्प्रहस्याह मा भैष्टेत्यवितास्म्यहम्। FE |
Seeing a human head with ear-rings lying at the entrance of the palace (in Kasi), the
people wondered whose head it was, and how it came. (25) Recognizing (at last) that it
was the head of their king (the ruler of Kasi), the queens, sons and relations of the king
and the citizens wailed loudly saying, “O lord, O master, O king, alas, we are (all)
undone.” (28) The king’s son, Sudaksina, performed the funeral rites to his father and
resolved in his mind that he would repay the debt to his father by killing his slayer. With
the help of his priest Sudaksina began to worship Sankara with the utmost concentration. (27-28)
Pleased with his worship at Kasi, Lord Sankara offered him a boon. Sudaksina replied, “
Lord, (if You are pleased with me) tell me by what means । can kill the slayer
of my father. That is the only boon | seek from You.” (29) Sankara said, “ With the
help of Brahmanas worship the sacred fire called Daksinagni, according to the Abhicara
method (employed for malevolent purposes). That fire, accompanied by Pramathas
(the attendants of Sankara) will accomplish your purpose (even) as a priest appointed
to carry out one’s wishes. It will, however, be powerless against one who is devoted
to Brahmanas.” Thus commanded (by Lord Sankara), Sudaksina did as he was bid,
observing strict discipline and directing the Abhicara force against Sri Krsna. (30-31) As
soon as the Abhicara was over, the god of fire emerged in person from the sacrificial pit,
assuming a very terrible form. His locks, moustaches and beard looked red like heated
copper; his eyes emitted sparks of fire. (32) His (large and protruding) teeth and threatening
eyebrows gave him a stern appearance; he was licking the corners of his mouth
