386 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 22

ज शे हयैत्यैकौ क रैनो दौ कक EAA LETK ATER HSE की HOH वीज्ज AES TET ECE SCH HEE Ree eee eee the
ज्न्रर्त्त

नमो विवृद्धसत्त्वाय पुरुषाय महीयसे । यो ब्रह्म क्षत्रमाविश्य बिभर्तीदं स्वतेजसा । ५२॥

Maitreya went on : As the king spoke thus, the manes and gods as well as the
Brahmanas (who had assembled there and) who were (all) pious souls, felt delighted at heart
and applauded him, uttering words of approbation. (45) (They said:) the Vedic text that "one
attains to the higher worlds through a (worthy) son’ is (quite) true. For the sinful Vena (Prthu's
father), who was killed by the curse of the Brahmanas, has been able to cross over (the
tortures of) hell (through you). (46) Even so Hiranyakasipu (the demon king) was about to
descend into hell as a consequence of his blaspheming the Lord, but escaped it through the
piety of his virtuous son, Prahrada. (47) O great hero, father of Earth, may you live happily
for numberless years—you who have such devotion to the immortal Lord, the one
(undisputed) Ruler of all the worlds ! (48) Ah ! having you for our ruler, O king of sacred
renown, we look upon ourselves as under the protection of Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of
Liberation) today, since you reveal (to us) the stories of Lord Visnu, the foremost of those
enjoying excellent fame anda votary of the Brahmana race. (49) Itis no great wonder on your
part, O lord, to instruct your dependants; for it is the nature of exalted souls possessed of
a tender heart to love their subjects. (50) Robbed of our judgement by our own actions (of
past lives), going by the name of destiny, we had been wandering (in the wilderness of
transmigration). Today you have led us across the darkness (of ignorance), O lord! (51) Hail
to you, the most adorable person, dominated by the quality of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and
Tamas, who inspiring the Brahmana race, protect the Ksatriya community and vice versa,
and inspiring both, maintain the whole universe by dint of your own energy. (52)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Four of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purdna, othenvise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

oF sect Fs

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXIl
The sage Sanaka and his three brothers impart
instruction to king Prthu

मैत्रेय उवाच
जनेषु OUR पृथुं पृथुलविक्रमम्। तत्रोपजग्मुर्मुनयश्चत्वार: सूर्यवर्चस: । १ ।
तांस्तु सिद्धेश्चरान् राजा व्योम्नोऽवतरतोऽर्चिषा | लोकानपापान् कुर्वत्या सानुगोऽचष्ट लक्षितान् । २ ।

तद्दर्शनोद्गतान् प्राणान् प्रत्यादित्सुरिवोत्थित: । ससदस्यानुगो वैन्य इन्द्रियेशो गुणानिव । ३ |
Tarp: सभ्य: प्रश्रयानतकन्धर: | विधिवत्पूजयाञ्चक्रे .गृहीतार्घ्यहणासनान् I ४ ।
तत्पादशौचसळलिलैर्मार्जितालकबन्धन: । तत्र शीलवतां वृत्तमाचरन्मानयन्निव । ५ ।
हाटकासन आसीनान् स्वधिष्ण्येष्विव पावकान्। श्रद्धासंयमसंयुक्त: प्रीत: प्राह भवाग्रजान् । ६ |
Maitreya continued : While the people were thus extolling Prthu of great prowess, there

came to that spot four sages, resplendent as the sun. (1) Surrounded by his attendants, the
king saw the lords of divine seers descending from the heavens. They were (easily)
