Dis. 45 ] BOOK TEN 291

RHE itn eR व न्न्न्न्र २२२०२०२०२२२२%२२२२०२ २२२4

अथ पञ्चचत्वारिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLV

The Lord brings back His preceptor’s son (from the abode of Death)
- श्रीगुक उवाच
पितराव्रुपलब्धार्थौ विदित्वा पुरुषोत्तम: । मा भूदिति निजां मायाँ ततान जनमोहिनीम्। १ ।
उवाच पितरावेत्य साग्रज: सात्वतर्षभ:। प्रश्रयावनत: प्रीणन्नम्ब तातेति सादरम् । २ ।
नास्मत्तो युवयोस्तात नित्योत्कण्ठितयोरपि । बाल्यपौगण्डकैशोरा: पुत्राभ्यामभवन् क्कचित् । ३ ।
न well दैवहतयोर्वासो नौ भवदन्तिके । चां बाला: पितृगेहस्था विन्दन्ते लालिता मुदम् । ४ ।
सर्वार्थसम्भवो देहो जनित: पोषितो gaia तयोर्याति feet पित्रोर्मर्त्य: शतायुषा । ५ |
यस्तयोरात्मज: कल्प Ae च धनेन alah न दद्यात्तं प्रेत्य स्वमांसं खादयन्ति हि । ६ ।
met पितरं वृद्धं areal साध्वीं सुतं fre । गुरुं विप्रं प्रपन्नं च कल्पोऽबिभ्रच्छ्वसन् FA: । ७ ।
तन्नावकल्पयो: कंसान्नित्यमुद्विग्रचेतसो: । मोघमेते व्यतिक्रान्ता दिवसा वामनर्चतो: । ८ |
तत् क्षन्तुमर्हथस्तात oat परतन्त्रयो: । अकुर्वतोर्वां शुश्रूषां क्लिष्टयोर्दुर्हदा भृशम्। ९ ।

Sri Suka began again : Having come to know that His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki)
had grasped the truth (about the divinity of the two Brothers) prematurely (before they had
enjoyed the supreme bliss of loving Them as their own sons, which was sure to be marred
by that knowledge), Sri Krsna (who was no other than the Supreme Person) spread His own
Maya (enchantment)—which infatuates His own people—so that such knowledge might not
endure. (1) Approaching His father and mother in the company of His elder brother
(Balarama) and bowing in humility, ine Jewel of the Satvatas spoke respectfully (to them as
follows), addressing them as “Mama and Papa" in order to delight them. (2) “Though you
have been all along full of longing for us, O father, the joys of witnessing the infancy,
childhood and boyhood of your sons (in us) have never fallen to your lot. (3) Ill-fated as we
are, the privilege of living by your side could not be attained by us (so far) nor was that joy
(ever) experienced by us, which children dwelling in their father's house and fondled by their
parents do. (4) Even (by serving them) through a life of (full) hundred years a mortal is not
able to get square with his parents by whom is brought into being and nourished this body
in which all (the four) objects (of human pursuit) can be realized. (5) The servants of Yama
actually make that son eat his own flesh on his departing from this world, who, though able-
bodied, does not with his body and resources maintain them. (6) He is dead (to all intents
and purposes), though breathing, who, though capable, fails to support his mother, aged
father, virtuous wife, infant son, preceptor, a Brahmana (depending on him) andone who has
sought him for protection.(7) Therefore (all) these days have slipped in vain by us who have
failed to serve you, helpless as we were, our mind being constantly afraid of Karhsa. (8) Be
pleased, O father and mother, to forgive that sin (of omission) on our part, who failedto render
service to you, subject as you were (to the will of another) and sore oppressed by that evil-
minded fellow (Karhsa)”.(9)

श्रीरुक उवाच

इति मायामनुष्यस्य हरेर्विश्वात्मनो गिरा । मोहितावङ्कमारोप्य परिष्वज्यापतुर्मुदम् । १०॥
