Dis. 13 ] ` 4 BOOK-ONE.., 53
RARMARARMAAOH MOANA RAR MOAR HLTH SHOHHAHERAHREAD AHEAD ACRE E DERG OREH OR ERE CRE ee

your race. | have been deceived by those noble souls ! O lord with mighty arms." (36) In the
meantime came the divine sage Narada, accompanied by the sage Tumburu. Yudhisthira
went forth with his younger brothers to receive them and, after greeting them, spoke with

reat reverence: (37

४ धं युधिष्ठिर उवाच

नाहं aq गतिं पित्रोर्भगवन् a गतावित:। अम्बा वा हतपुत्राऽरर्ता छ्व गता च तपस्विनी 1321

कर्णधार इवापारे भगवान् पारदर्शाक:। अथाबभाषे भगवान् नारदो मुनिसत्तम: 1३९1

मा कंचन Yel राजन् alae जगत्। लोका: सपाला यस्येमे वहन्ति बलिमीशितु: |

स संयुनक्ति yor स va वियुनक्ति च ।४०।

यथा Tat नसि प्रोतास्तन्त्यां बद्धा: स्वदामभि: | area नामभिर्बद्धा वहन्ति बलिमीशितु: ।४१॥

यथा क्रीडोपस्कराणां संयोगविगमाविह। इच्छया क्रीडितु: स्यातां तथैवेरोच्छया FO 1x2 |

यन्मन्यसे ध्रुवं लोकमध्रुवं वा न diva aden न हि छोच्यास्ते स्नेहादन्यत्र मोहजात् ।४३॥

तस्माज्जह्यङ्ग वैक्लव्यमज्ञानकृतमात्मन: | कथं AM: कृपणा वर्तेरंस्ते च ai विना ।४४॥

कालकर्मगुणाधीनो देहोऽयं पाञ्चभोतिक: | कथमन्यांस्तु गोपायेत्सर्पग्रस्तो यथा mex!

अहस्तानि सहस्तानामपदानि चतुष्पदाम्। फल्गूनि तत्र महतां जीवो जीवस्य जीवनम् ।४६॥

तदिदं भगवान् राजन्नेक आत्माऽऽत्मनां BEG | अन्तरोऽनन्तरो भाति पश्य तं माययोरुधा ive!

सोऽयमद्य महाराज भगवान् भूतभावन: । कालस्पोऽवतीर्णोऽस्यामभावाय सुरद्विषाम् isc

निष्पादितॆ देवकृत्यमवशेषं प्रतीक्षते। तावद् यूयमवेक्षध्वं ude यावदिहेश्चर: ।४९।

Yudhisthira said : "! know not the movements of my uncles, 0 divine sage; | wonder

where they have gone hence. Nor do | know where is gone my aunt, so well-known for her
austere penance and distressed at the loss of her sons. (38) Your Holiness alone can guide
us across this endless ocean (of grief) as a pilot in the deep.” Thereupon the worshipful
Narada, the foremost among sages, spoke (as follows) :—(39)"Grieve not for anybody, 0
king; for the world is under the control of God. It is to Him, the supreme Ruler of all, that all
these worlds along with their rulers offer their homage. It is He who unites and He again who
parts living beings from one another. (40) Even as oxen, controlled individually by small
strings passed through their nostrils and held together by a strong rope, carry loads for their
master, so these human beings, tied down to the rope of the divine word (the Veda) through
the smaller strings of their different denominations (such as Brahmana, Brahmacari and so
on), Offer their worship to God (through their respective duties). (41) Even as playthings here
(in this world) are brought together and separated by the will of the player, so do the coming
together and parting of human beings depend on the will of God. (42) Whether you consider
human beings to be eternal (as the soul or spirit) or ephemeral (as the corporeal body) or
both eternal and transient (as embodied souls) or as neither eternal nor ephemeral (as the
unspeakable Absolute, which is devoid of all attributes), they are not worth grieving for
unless through affection born of infatuation. (43) Therefore, O dear Yudhisthira, shake off
the uneasiness of mind, caused by ignorance, as to how those people (your uncles and
aunt) may be faring without you, helpless and miserable as they are. (44) This body,
constituted as it is of the five elements (viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether), is subject to
the control of time, fate and the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas). How
can it protect others any more than a man fallen in the jaws of a python can help
another?(45) The handless (such as the quadruped) serve as the subsistence of those that
have hands (such as human beings); those that have no feet (such as grass etc.) sustain
the life of the four-footed animals; and:(even among the handless) the smaller ones serve
