Dis. 44] मा BOOK TEN 287

ee ee et ee ee ee ee en ch ene आड गक ककाकणततकागाककतमजरतत

गा: पालयन् सहबल: क्वणयंश्च वेणुं विक्रीडयाञ्चति गिरित्ररमार्चिताङ्घ्रि: । १३।
गोप्यस्तप: किमचरन् यदमुष्य रूपं लावण्यसारमसमार्ध्वमनन्यसिद्धम् ।
दृग्भि: पिबन्त्यनुसवाभिनवं दुरापमेकान्तधाम aera: fir ware ।१४॥
या दोहनेऽवहनने मथनोपलेपप्रेङ्खेङ्खनार्भरुदितोक्षणमार्जनादॊ |
Tata चैनमनुरक्तधियोऽश्रुकण्ठयो wen asf उरुक्रमचित्तयाना: ।१५॥
- प्रातर्व्रजाद् व्रजत आविदातश्च सायं गोभि: समं क्णयतोऽस्य निशम्य वेणुम् ।
निर्गम्य तूर्णमबला: पथि भूरिपुण्या: पद्यन्ति सस्मितमुखं सदयावलोकम् । १६1
Full of compassion all the ladies (present there) collected in batches and spoke to one
another about the contest being ill-matched (as going on between strong and feeble rivals),
Oking! (6) “Itis gross unrighteousness on the part of the king’s courtiers, who countenance
such acontest alas! between the strong and the weak while the king sits looking on! (7) What
comparison can there be between the two wrestlers (Canura and Mustika) of adamantine
frame and closely resembling a pair of two large mountains (on the one hand) and the two
lads (Balarama and Sri Krsna) of extremely delicate limbs, who have not yet attained their
youth (on the other)? (8) Forfeiture of religious merit (earned in the past) will surely fall to the
lot of this assembly. As a matter of fact one should never stay there where unrighteousness
fully rears its head. (9) Recognizing the faults of those present in an assembly a wise man
should not (even) enter that assembly; (fer) a man keeping silent (even though knowing a
fact), making a false statement (in order to please those assembled) or pleading ignorance
(surely) incurs sin. (10) Mark the lotus face—dripping all over with perspiration even like a
lotus bud sprinkled with water—of Sri Krsna quickly shifting His position about His
adversary.(11) Don't you see the face of Balarama with reddish eyes, full of wrath as itis for
Mustika and enlivened by a bellicose spirit accompanied with risibility ? (12) Ah, blessed is
the soil of Vraja on which treads in a merrily sportful spirit this Most Ancient Person—whose
feet are adored (even) by Lord Siva (the Guardian of Mount Kailasa) and Rama (the goddess
of beauty and prosperity)—disguised in a human semblance and adorned with sylvan
flowers of various kinds, tending cows in the company of Balarama and playing on His flute.
(13) What austerities did the cowherd women (of Vraja) perform, by virtue of which they
imbibe with (the cup of) their eyes (the beauty) of His bewitching form—the (very) essence
of elegance—which is not only unsurpassed but unequalled (foo), is not embellished by
anything external, is eternally new and hard to attain and which is the unfailing abode of
renown, splendour and divine glory ? (14) Blessed are the women of Vraja, who celebrate
Him in song while milking their cows, pounding the com, churning their curds, plastering their
floor (with cowdung etc.), rocking the cradles, lulling their crying babes, sprinkling and
sweeping their houses and attending to other such duties with a mind full of love and their
throat choked with tears, (nay, all) whose movements are inspired bythe thought of Sr Krsna
(who is no other than Lord Visnu, who took wide strides while measuring the three worlds
during His descent as the divine Dwarf). (15) Possessed of endless merit are those women
who—having heard His music (even) as He sallies forth from Vraja in the morning and
returns in the evening alongwith the cows playing on the flute—come out hastily on the road
and behold His smiling countenance enlivened with kind glances.” (16)

wa प्रभाषमाणासु स्रीषु योगेश्वरो हरि: । शत्रुं हन्तुं मनश्चक्रे भगवान् भरतर्षभ 1291
सभवा: स्रीगिर: श्रुत्वा पुत्रस्नेहशुचाऽऽतुरौ । पितरावन्वतप्येतां पुत्रयोरबुधौ बलम् । १८॥
तैस्तैर्नियुद्धविधिभिर्विविधैरच्युतेतरौ । युयुधाते यथान्योन्यं ada बलमुष्टिकौ ।१९॥

