Dis. 16] BOOK ELEVEN 585

+ ग गक व ROR TEE CRON TO TNE ROCHE NT OR ETES CHEEK ORE TRENT EERE NRE eee

ब्रह्मर्षीणां भृगुरहं राजर्षीणामहं मनु: । देवर्षीणां नारदोऽहं हविर्धान्यस्मि धेनुषु । १४॥
सिद्धेश्चराणां afte: सुपर्णोऽहं पतत्रिणाम्। प्रजापतीनां दक्षोऽहं पितॄणामहमर्यमा eu
मां विद्ध्युद्धव दैत्यानां प्रह्रादमसुरेश्वम्। सोमं नक्षत्रौषधीनां att यक्षरक्षसाम् ।१६।
ed गजेन्द्राणां यादसां वरुणं प्रभुम्।तपतां gaat wi मनुष्याणां च भूपतिम् । १७॥
उच्चै:श्रवास्तुरङ्खाणां धातूनामस्मि काञ्चनम्। यम: संयमतां चाहं सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकि: 1921
नागेन्द्राणामनन्तोऽहं मृगेन्द्र: शृङ्गिदंष्टिणाम्। आश्रमाणामहं तुर्यो वर्णानां प्रथमोऽनघ । १९॥
Waist स्रोतसां गङ्गा wa: सरसामहम्। आयुधानां धनुरहं त्रिपुरघ्नो धनुष्मताम् ।२०॥

The glorious Lord replied : In alike manner | was put this very question by Arjuna while
just going to fight with his enemies at (the battle-field of) Kuruksetra, O chief of those
possessing insight into the meaning of questions ! (6) Feeling like the common man that
"| am the slayer and the other one is slain (by me)”, and believing that slaying one’s kinsfolk
for the sake of kingdom is reproachful and unrighteous, he ceased from that act (at the
beginning). {7} Disillusioned by My reasoning, that tiger among men then interrogated Me
at the van of fight in the same way as you have done. (8) | am the Self, the Befriender and
the Ruler of all these created beings, O Uddhava ! (in fact,) | am all the beings as well as
responsible for their birth, life and death. (9) 1am the motion of the mobile and Kala (the Time-
Spirit) among those that bring others under their control. । am the state of equilibrium (in the
shape of Prakriti) of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and the property natural to a thing
with attributes. (10) | am the Sitra (the active aspect of Mahat-tattva, the very first evolute
of Prakrti) among the products constituted of the three Gunas; (nay,) | am Mahat-tattva (the
principle of cosmic intelligence) among big things. Of subtle principles | am the Jiva (the
embodied soul); and of those that are difficult to conquer । am the mind. (11) Of the Vedas
| am their teacher, Brahma (who taught them for the first time to his mind-born sons); of
Mantras (sacred texts) | am Pranava (the sacred syllable OM), consisting of three members
(A.U,M). Of the letter-sounds | am the sound represented by the letter’ »’ (A); of metres lam
the metre Gayatri (consisting of three feet). (12) Of all the gods | am Indra (their chief); of the
(eight) Vasus (a particular class of gods) । am the god of fire (who carries oblations to the
gods). Of the (twelve) sons of Aditil am Visnu (known by the name of Upendra, the youngest,
who appeared in the court of the demon king Bali as a dwarf and robbed him of hls dominion
extending over the three worlds); of the (eleven) Rudras, | am Nila-Lohita (Lord Siva). (13)
Of the nine Brahmana sages (born of Brahma’s mind) | am Bhrgu (the foremost of them); of
the royal sages | am (Swayambhuva) Manu. Of the celestial sages | am Narada; of cows |
am Kamadhenu (lit., the storehouse of milk and its products used as oblations for the gods). (14)
Of the lords of Siddhas | am Lord Kapila; of birds | am Garuda (the king of birds, the carrier
of Lord Visnu). Of Prajapatis (the gods presiding over creation) | am Daksa (the foremost of
them), of the manes | am Aryama (their head). (15) Of Daityas (the sons of Diti) know Me to
be Prahrada, the ruler of the demons. Of the stars and annual plants know Me to be (their
tuler,) the moon-god; of Yaksas and Raksasas know Me to be (their chief) Kubera (the lord
of treasures), O Uddhava ! (16) Of the lords of elephants know Me to be Airavata (the carrier
of Indra); of aquatic creatures know Me to be their lord, Varuna (the god presiding over the
waters). Of those emitting heat and light know Me to be the sun; and know Me to be the king
among men. (17) | am Uccaihsrava among horses; of metals | am gold. Of those that
punish, | am Yama (the god of retribution); and of serpents | am Vasuki (the chief of
serpents). (18) Of the rulers of snakes | am Lord Ananta (the serpent-god), of all animals
