522 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2

ui: oaanged विरक्तिरन्यत्र चैष त्रिक एककाल: |
Sverre यथाश्नत: स्युस्तुष्टि। पुष्टि:; क्षुदपायोऽनुधासम् se
इत्यच्युताङ्घ्रिं भजतोऽनुवृत्त्या भक्तिर्विरक्तिर्भगवत्प्रबोध: |
भवन्ति a भागवतस्य राजंस्तत: परां झान्तिमुपैति साक्षात् ।४३॥

Kavi said ; | believe that, for the man whose mind is always agitated by mistaking this
worthless body etc., for one's own self, worship of the Lord's lotus-feet is the safest course
in that through such worship (all) fear completely disappears. (33) All those courses of
conduct which were actually taught by the Lord Himself for His own Realization without much
exertion even by the ignorant, surely know them as conducive to His pleasure. (34) O king,
resorting to those courses a man would never go astray; even if he follows them running (in
a desultory way) or with closed eyes (ignorantly), he would not stumble or take a false
step.(35) Whatever he does with his body. tongue, mind or senses, reason or intellect or by
the force of his inherited nature, he should consecrate all as an offering to the supreme Lord
Narayana. (36) He who has turned away from the Lord loses the memory (of his real self),
thanks to His Maya, and falls a prey to the erroneous belief that the body is one's own self,
He is then seized with fear engendered by identification with the body (which is other than
theself). Therefore, a discerning person should worship Him with exclusive devotion, looking
upon his preceptor as the Deity as well as his own self. (37) Though duality has no (real)
existence, it does appear like a dream or mental image to the mind of one who dwells upon
It. Therefore, a wise man should control that mind from which proceed ideations and doubts.
Fearlessness will follow fromit. (38) (Therefore) hearingof the most auspicious descents and
deeds of Sri Hari (the Wielder of the discus) and singing His names denoting His descents
and actions, well-known in the world, without any fear of being mocked at, one should move
about free from attachment. (39) The man who, having adopted such a course of conduct,
develops love for Him by singing the names of his beloved Lord, hisheart melting indevotion,
loudly laughs and weeps, screams, sings or dances like one possessed, transgressing
conventions. (40) With exclusive devotion he bows to the sky, air, fire, water, earth, heavenly
bodies, living beings cardinal points, trees and the like. rivers and seas and all created
beings, considering them as the body of the Lord (41) As one who eats (food) feels satisfied,
gets nourishment and relief from hunger with every morsel, (similarly) in him who has
resigned himself to the Lord, devotion, realization of the supreme Lord and aversion to other
objects—all the three appear at once. (42) In the votary of God O king, who worships
uninterruptedly as aforesaid the feet of Sri Hari (the immortal Lord) Devotion, a distaste for
the enjoyments of the world and direct knowledge of God appear (simultaneously); and
through them he directly attains (the state of) supreme peace. (43)

सि

राजोवाच
अथभागक्तंब्रूतयद्धर्पोय।दृशोनृणाम्।यधाक्लीयद्ब्रूतेवैर्लिङ्गेर्भंगत्रस्निय;।४४।

The king (Nimi) submitted : Now (kindly) describe the characteristics of the Lord's
devotee among men, his disposition and course of conduct, how he behaves and what he
speaks, and the distinctive traits which make him the favourite of the Lord. (44)

Beara
सर्वभूतेषु य: पश्येद् भगवद्भावमात्मन: । भूतानि भगवत्यात्मन्येष भागवतोत्तम: 1% |
ert तदधीनेषु बालिहोषु द्विषत्सु च । प्रेममैत्रीकृपोपेक्षा a: करोति स मध्यम: ।४६॥
अर्चायामेव हरये पूजां य: श्नद्धयेहृते।नतद्भक्तेघुचान्येषुसभक्त:प्राकृत;स्मृत्त;।४७।

