336 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

PREAH HEED E EE EEA ADELE ERHEEEELOERAEREKEPREE HET EL ETHER EET ORR AER HHA Hee

शङ्खदुन्दुभिनादेन ब्रह्मघोषेण वेणुभि: । निश्चक्राम पुरात्तूर्णमात्मजाभीक्षणोत्सुक: ।४०॥
wi: सुरुचिंश्चास्य महिष्यो रुक्मभूषिते। आरुह्य शिबिकां सार्धमुत्तमेनाभिजग्मतु: ive!
तं दृष्टोपवनाभ्याश आयान्तं तरसा रथात्। अवरुह्य नॄपस्तूर्णमासाद्य प्रेमविह्वल: ।४२॥
परिरेभेऽङ्गजं dat दीर्घोत्कण्ठमना: श्वसन्। विष्वक्सेनाङ्घध्रिसंस्पर्शहताशोषाघबन्धनम् ।४३॥
अथाजिघ्रन्मुहुर्मूर्धि शीतैर्नयनवारिभि: । स्नापयामास तनयं जातोद्दाममनोरथ: vv
When the king (Uttanapada) heard that his son (Dhruva) was coming back, he did not
give credence to the news any more than one would believe the story of anyone's returning
to life after death (and said to himself,)" How could a wretched being like me have such good
luck ?" (37) He (however) put faith in the words of the celestial sage (Narada) and was
(forthwith) overwhelmed with intensity of joy. Highly pleased with the man who had brought
the news, he rewarded him with a costly pearl necklace. (38) Eager to see his son, he
mounted a car decked with gold and drawn by excellent horses and, surrounded by
Brahmanas, the elders of his race, ministers and kinsfolk, sallied forth from the city, while
conchs were being blown and kettledrums sounded, Vedic hymns were loudly chanted and
flutes played upon (even as he drove in the car). (39-40) Adorned with gold ornaments, his
two queens, Suniti and Suruci, too mounted a palanquin and proceeded along with prince
Uttama ( Suruci's son). (41) The king, whose heart had been pining for his son for along time,
hurriedly alighted from the car when he saw the boy coming near the garden, and quickly
went up to him. Overpowered with affection and heaving deep sighs, he folded in his arms
Dhruva, who had been absolved of all his sins and freed from all bondages by the touch of
Lord Visnu's feet. (42-43) His great ambition (of seeing his son safe and sound again) having
been realized, the king smelt Dhruva’s head (out of affection) again and again and bathed
him with his cool tears (of love and joy). (44)
अभिवन्द्य faq: पादावाशीर्भिश्चाभिमन्त्रित: | ननाम मातरॊ eitet सत्कृत: सज्जनाग्रणी: 164 |
ae समुत्थाप्य पादावनतमर्भकम्। परिष्वज्याह जीवेति बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा we)
aa प्रसन्नो भगवान् गुणैर्मैत्र्यादिभिर्हरि: । तस्मै नमन्ति भूतानि निम्नमाप ga स्वयम् ivy
उत्तमश्च ध्रुवश्चोभावन्योन्यं प्रेमविह्वलौ | अङ्गसङ्गादुत्पुलकावस्रौघं मुहुरूहतु: । ४८1
सुनीतिरस्य wet प्राणेभ्योऽपि fra सुतम्। उपगुह्य जहावाधिं तदङ्मस्पर्शनिर्वृता ॥४९॥
पय:स्तनाभ्यां Gara नेत्रजै: alee: fra: । तदाभिषिच्यमानाभ्यां ade वीरसुवो WE ।५०॥
तां शशंसुर्जना wait दिष्ट्या ते ga आर्तिहा । प्रतिलब्धश्चिरं नष्टो रक्षिता मण्डलं Ya: 142!
अभ्यर्चितस्त्वया Fa भगवान् प्रणतार्तिहा । यदनुध्यायिनो धीरा मृत्युं जिग्यु: सुदुर्जयम् 1421
Having bowed at his father's feet and received his benedictions (in return), and being
kindly spoken to and received with honour by him, Dhruva, the foremost of noble souls, bent
his head low to both his mothers (Sunitiand Suruci). (45) Lifting up the child fallen at her feet,
Suruci (Dhruva's stepmother) pressed it to her bosom and in a voice choked with tears said,
"May you live (long) !" (46) Just as water flows down to a low level of its own accord, so all
living beings submit to him who has pleased Sri Hari through virtues like friendliness (to all)
and so on. (47) Both Uttama and Dhruva experienced a thrill of joy when, overwhelmed with
love, they hugged each other and sheda flood of tears again and again. (48) Suniti, Dhruva's
mother, was relieved of her agony as she hugged her son, who was dearer (to her) than life,
and felt gratified by the very touch of his body. (49) Milk incessantly flowed, O valiant Vidura,

from the breasts of Suniti (the mother of a hero), bathed as they were at that time with her
tears of joy. (50) The people (of the city) felicitated the (senior) queen (Suniti) and said,
