226 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20

SOR AE ER REN RAE EOE ES HEE KALE HSK ESSE SERA ELEE OH SHEET T KHER HHH OHH

विससर्ज तनुं तां वै ज्योत्स्नां कान्तिमतीं प्रियाम्। wa चाददु: प्रीत्या विश्वावसुपुरोगमा: 13¢1

With a laugh full of deep significance the worshipful Brahma evolved by his own
loveliness, which seemed to enjoy itself by itself, hosts of Gandharvas (celestial musicians)
and Apsaras (dancing girls of heaven). (38) (After that) he gave up that shining and beloved
form made of moon-light. Vigwavasu and the other Gandharvas themselves gladly took
possession of it. (39)

ae भूतपिशाचांश्च भगवानात्मतन्दिणा । दिग्वाससो मुक्तकेशान्वीक्ष्य चामीलयद्दृशो ।४०॥
जगृहुस्तद्विसृष्टां A जृम्भणाख्यां तनुं प्रभो:। निद्रामिन्दियविक्केदो यया भूतेषु दृश्यते |
येनोच्छिष्टान्धर्षयन्ति तमुन्मादं प्रचक्षते ।४१।

The glorious Brahma (next) evolved out of his sloth the Bhitas (ghosts) and Pisacas
(fiends); but he closed his eyes when he saw them stand naked with their hair
dishevelled. (40) The Bhitas and Pigacas themselves took possession of the body,
in the form of yawn, thrown off by Brahma, the lord of beings. It is also known as
sleep, which causes the mouth etc., of living beings to eject running saliva. And
these very Bhitas and Pisacas attack men who are rendered impure in this way
and such attack of theirs is spoken of as insanity. (41)

ऊर्जस्वन्तं मन्यमान आत्मानं भगवानज:। साध्यान्गणान्पितॄगणान्परोक्षेणासृजत्प्रभु: ।४२॥
त आत्मसर्गं तं कायं पितर: प्रतिपेदिरे। साध्येभ्यश्च पितृभ्यश्च कवयो यद्वितन्वते ॥४३॥

Recognizing himself as full of vigour and energy, the worshipful Brahma, the lord of
beings, evolved out of his invisible form the hosts of the Sadhyas and the Pitrs (manes). (42)
The Pitrs themselves took possession of that invisible body, the source of their existence.
It is through the medium of this invisible body (of the Pitrs) that those well-versed in the ritual
offer oblations to the Sadhyas and the Pitrs (in the form of their departed ancestors on the
occasion of Sraddhaetc,). (43)

सिद्धान् विद्याधरांश्चैव तिरोधानेन सोऽसृजत्। तेभ्योऽददात्तमात्मानमन्तर्धानाख्यमद्भुतम् ।॥४४॥
स किन्नरान् किम्पुरुषान् प्रत्यात्स्येनासृजत्प्रभु: | मानयन्नात्मनाऽऽत्मानमात्माभासं विलोकयन् ।४५॥
ते तु तज्गृहू रूपं त्यक्तं यत्परमेष्ठिना । मिथुनीभूय गायन्तस्तमेवोषसि कर्मभि: rsa

By his faculty of remaining hidden from view Brahma evolved the species of living
beings called the Siddhas and the Vidyadharas, and gave them that marvellous form of
his, known by the name of Antardhana (the faculty of remaining hidden from view). (44)
One day Brahma (the lord of beings) beheld his own reflection (in water) and, admiring
himself through that, evolved the Kimpurusas as well as Kinnaras out of that very
reflection. (45) They took possession of that (shadowy) form, which was left by Brahma.
That is why they sing his praises by recounting his exploits at daybreak (every morning)
with their spouses. (46)

aa a aman wart बहुचिन्तया । सर्गेऽनुपचिते क्रोधादुत्ससर्ज ह तद्वपु: Ive!
येऽहीयन्तामुत: केशा अहयस्तेऽङ्ग जज्ञिरे। सर्पा: प्रसर्पत: क्रूरा नागा भोगोरुकन्धरा: ।४८॥

Once Brahma lay with his body stretched at full length, much concerned over the fact that
the work of creation had not proceeded apace, and ina sullen mood shed that body too. (47)
The hair that dropped from that body (ashe apparently pulled themin afit of excitement) were
transformed into snakes, dear Vidura; while, even as the body crawled along (with its hands
and feet contracted), there sprang from it ferocious serpents and Nagas with their necks
