696 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

BERGER GOROWEREMEME RE र्म्मक TENSEI LENE MELE AME ETE EE EEE HN RTO EE

Immobile creatures (e.g., annual plants and trees etc.) and (in some cases) the mobile too
constitute the Vrtti (means of subsistence) of mobile creatures. There (again) the sustenance
of human beings has been determined 1— by their nature, 2— desire or 3—even by scriptural
ordinance. (A description contained in Book Five of Srimad Bhagavata, of the terrestrial
globe, as the support of the entire creation, both mobile and immobile, thus falls under the
category of 'Vrtti'.) (13) The exploits of the Avataras of Bhagavan Visnu (the immortal Lord),
appearing from age to age according to the needs of every age among birds and beasts,
human beings, Rsis and gods—by whom the enemies of the Vedas (such as the demons)
are put an end to (for the protection of the righteous)—constitute (what is known as) the
"Raksa’” (protection) of the universe. (14) The period over which (the following six, viz.,) a
Manu, the gods, the sons of the Manu, Indra (the ruler of the gods), the (seven) Rsis and the
partial manifestation of the Lord preside is what goes by the name of a Manvantara
characterized by six elements. (15) "Varnsa" denotes the line, extending over (all) the three
divisions of time (viz., the past, present and future), of king of pure descent (as sprung from
Brahma). A connected account of such kings as also of their descendants (upholding the
honour and prestige of the line) is (what has been referred to by the name of)
Varhnsanucarita.(16) The fourfold dissolution of this (visible) universe, manifested by Maya,
viz., 1-occasional, 2-Prakritika, 3-constant and 4-radical, has been spoken of by the sage as
"Sarmstha".(17) The "Hetu” (cause) of creation etc., of this (phenomenal) universe is the Jiva
(the individual soul), the doer of actions prompted by ignorance, which some people (who
stress its spiritual nature) characterize as having to its credit a stock of unrequited Karma;
while others (who emphasize its conditioned existence) declare it as nameless and
formless.(18) 'Apasraya’ stands for Brahma (the Absolute), which is present in (all) the
(three) states undergone by a Jiva (individual soul), viz., wakefulness, dream and deep
slumber, as wellasin all substances which are products of Maya (as their cause), andis also
distinct from them, (nay,) which actually runs through all the (nine) states undergone by a
living organism, from entry into the womb in the form of a seed to death (as their ground or
substratum), and is also distinct from them (as their witness) even like the material of which
substances are made or as bare existence underlying names and forms. (19-20) When the
mind becomes still of its own accord (through realization of the illusoriness of Sarga etc., as
in the case of Vamadeva and other sages) or through concentration (practised in one's
current life, as in the case of mother Devahuti and others), then one realizes the Self
(consequent on the cessation of ignorance due to absence of distraction) and, transcending
the three states (of consciousness), withdraws from (worldly) activity. (21)

एवं लक्षणलक्ष्याणि पुराणानि पुराविद: । मुनयोऽष्टादश प्राहु: क्षुल्लकानि महान्ति च । २२।

wa Ue वैष्णवं च wd लैङ्गं सगारुडम्।नारदीयं भागवतमाम्नेयं स्कान्दसंज्ञितम् ।२३॥

भविषष्य ब्रह्मवैवर्तं मार्कण्डेयं सवामनम्।वाराहंमात्स्यं कौर्म च ब्रह्माण्डाख्यमिति free । २४।

ब्रह्मन्निरं समाख्यातं झाखाप्रणयनं मुमे: । शिष्यशिष्यप्रशिष्याणां ब्रह्मतेजोविवर्धनम् । २५॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणॆ पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धे सप्तमोऽध्याय: ।७1

Sages well-versed in the antiquities tell us of eighteen Puranas, big and small (in
volume), distinguished by the aforesaid characteristics. (22) The eighteen Puranas go by
the names of Brahma, Padma, Visnu, Siva, Linga, Garuda, Narada, Bhagavata, Agni,
Skanda, Bhavisya, Brahmavaivarta, Markandeya, Vamana, Varaha, Matsya, Kurma and

Brahmandaa. (23-24) In this way has been duly narrated (by me), O Brahmana sage, the story
as to how the sage Vedavyasa and his pupils, their own pupils and pupils of their pupils
