10 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2

ERE RE कक या BORE REM दाजो REAM MOM BOSON M न उजा ME MORE NOR GRAMM ARC जो जो जोती कॆ तं PE MC MRR Ra ME Be द् ज्जीजं Re ह रो ना CAME Re हो a He He वी HOME ME

region and goes back again; while these (JAana and Vairagya) have been kept by you by your
own side treating them as your sons. (11) Through neglect in Kaliyuga both your sons have
become sluggish and old. Nevertheless cease you worrying; (in the meantime) | am taxing
my brain about a remedy. (12) There is no age like Kali, O lady with a charming countenance !
In this Yuga | shall establish you in every house and in every individual. (13) If | fail to
propagate you in the world throwing into the background (all) other cults and placing above
all grand celebrations (connected with Devotion), | am no longer a servant of Sri Hari. (14)
Even though sinners, men who will be endowed with you in this age of Kali will attain (after
death) the abode of Sri Krsna, which is free from (all) fear. (15) Those pure-bodied souls in
whose mind constantly abides Devotion in the form of love (for the Lord) do not see (the face
of ) Yama (the god of punishment) even in a dream. (16) Neither the spirit of a departed soul
nor a fiend nor an ogre nor a demon has got the power (even) to touch those whose mind
is enriched with Devotion. (17) Sri Hari can be won neither by means of austerities nor
through ( the study of) the Vedas, nor through spiritual enlightenment nor even through

righteous action; He can be won only through Devotion. The cowherdesses (of Vraja) bear
testimony to this. (18) Fondness for Devotion is in fact engendered in the mind of men after
thousands of lives. In Kaliyuga, in the age of Kali, Bhakti alone is supreme; as a result of Bhakti
Sri Krsna (reveals Himself and) stands at our (very) door. (19) Those who are hostile to Bhakti
suffer in all the three worlds. In the past the sage Durvasa, who reproached a devotee (in the
person of King Ambarisa ) came to grief. (20) Have done with (the observance of) sacred vows.
Have done with (undertaking pilgrimages to) sacred Places. Have done with spiritual
disciplines.Have donewith sacrificial performances and have done with discourses on spiritual
enlightenment. Bhakti alone is capable of conferring Liberation. (21)
सूत उवाच
sft नारदनिर्णीतं warmed fea सा । सर्वाङ्गपुष्टिसंयुक्ता ame वाक्यमब्रवीत् । २२।
Sita resumed : Hearing thus of her own glory as ascertained by Narada, Bhakti got
enriched with the fulness of all her limbs and spoke to him as follows. (22)
भक्तिरुवाच
अहो are धन्योऽसि प्रीतिस्ते मयि निश्चला । न कदाचिद्बिमुञ्चामि चित्ते स्थास्यामि सर्वदा 1231
कृपालुना त्वया साधो मद्बाधा ध्वंसिता क्षणात्। पुत्रयोश्चैतना नास्ति ततो Ste बोधय । २४॥
Bhakti said : O Narada, you are (really) blessed. Your devotion to me is unflinching. | shall

ever abide in your heart and shall never forsake you. (23) My agony has been dispelled by you
in a moment, compassionate as you are,O pious soul ! Consciousness, however, has not yet
returned to my sons; therefore (pray) awaken them, bring them back to consciousness. (24)

सूत उवाच
तस्या वच: समाकर्ण्य कारुण्यं नारदो Ta: । तयोर्बोधनमारेभे कराग्रेण विमर्दयन् । २५॥
qa संयोज्य कर्णान्ते शब्दमुच्चै: समुच्चरन् । ज्ञान प्रबुध्यतां शीघ्रं रे वैराग्य प्रबुध्यताम् । २६॥
वेदवेदान्तघोषॆश्च गीतापाटैर्मुहुर्मुहु: | बोध्यमानौ तदा तेन कथंचिच्चोत्थितौ बलात् । २७।
apart at निरीक्ष्यैव ga: स्वापपरायणौ । ऋषिश्चिन्तापरो जात: किं fade मयेति च । २९1
aa fia कथं याति qed च महत्तरम्। चिन्तयन्निति गोविन्दं स्मारयामास भार्गव 1201

* For the story of King Ambarisa see discourses IV and ४ ol Book Nine of Srimad Bhagavata.
