506 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

FERRI eee fa nonin fete रीक torre reer Fe re ee RE em AT Fe tT TT कतीनत्रीत्जौ

waka भक्तिर्भगवत्यकिञ्चना सर्वैर्गुणैस्तत्र समासते सुरा:।
हरावभक्तस्य कुतो महद्गुणा मनोरथेनासति धावतो बहि:।१२॥
हित्वा महांस्तं यदि wert Je तदा महत्त्वं वयसा दम्पतीनाम्।१३॥
तस्माद्रजोरागविषादमन्युमानस्पृहाभयदॆन्याधिमूलम् ।
feet गृहं संसृतिचक्रवालं नृसिंहपादं भजताकुतोभयमिति।१४॥

Again, in Harivarsa the Lord abides in the form of Narahari (aman-lion). The circumstances
that led Him to assume that (queer) form | shall relate later on (while narrating the story of
Prahrada in Book Vil). The great devotee, Prahrada, who is an abode of all good qualities
inhering in exalted souls and whose virtue and (ideal) conduct brought sanctity to the (entire)
race of the Daityas and Danavas, adores this form, beloved of him, through a course of
uninterrupted and undivided devotion, alongwith the (other) people inhabiting that Varsa,
and repeats the following (prayer):—(7) "Hail to Lord Narasirhha, who is denoted by the
mystical syllable OM | Hail to the Light of all lights !! Fully reveal Yourself, O Lord with
adamantine claws and adamantine teeth !!! Burn down, O burn down (our) latent desires (the
seeds of future actions); swallow up, O swallow up (all) darkness (in the form of ignorance).
We offer our worship to You, O Lord, O appear (in the horizon of) our mind in such a way
as to make us fearless, to rid us of (all) fear Ksraum” !" (8) "May all be well with the world;
may the wicked become gentle. May (all) living beings contemplate good to one another with
their intellect and may their mind resort only to that which is good; and may our thought as
well as the thought of others be fixed on You (Lord Visnu) without any motive (whatso-
ever).(9) If there be (any) attachment in our heart, let it be for the loving devotees of the Lord
and on no account for (our) dwelling, wife, children, wealth and kinsmen. (For) he who is
contented with the (bare) necessaries of life and self-possessed attains blessedness at no
distant date, but not he who loves the objects of the senses. (10) Entering through the ears
the mind of those who repeatedly listen to the purifying accounts of the exploits of Lord Visnu
(the Bestower of Liberation) which possess a unique glory of their own and which one gets
to hear in the’ company of such devotees—the birthless Lord takes away the impurities of
their mind ! Who (then) would not resort to such devotees ? (11) In (the heart of) aman who
is blessed with exclusive devotion to the Lord permanently dwell the gods with all (their)
virtues. (But) how can the qualities of exalted souls exist in him who, far from being a devotee
of the Lord, runs after the illusory objects of senses under the impulse of desire ? (12) As
water is dear to the fish as their (very) life, Lord Sri Hari indeed is the (veritable) soul of all
embodied beings.|gnoring Him, if aman, however great he may be, remains attached to his
home, his greatness, then, is reduced to that type which couples claim in advanced age. (13)
Therefore, renouncing the home—which is the root avidity (the thirst for pleasures),
attachment, grief, anger, pride, longing (for another's wife and wealth etc.), fear, wretchedness
and mental anguish and, as such perpetuate the cycle of births and deaths take refuge in
the feet of Lord Nrsimha, the only safe retreat.” (14)

[पतीनां युषाहोरात्रपरिसंख्यानानां यासां aut महापुरुषमहास्त्रतेजसोद्वे भ्ल्
व्यसव: संवत्सरान्ते विनिपतन्ति। eu अतीव सुललितगतिविलासविलसितरुचिरहासलेशावलोक-
लीलयाकिञ्चिदुत्तम्भितसुन्दरभ्रूमण्डलसुभगवदनारविन्दश्रिवा रमां रमयन्निन्द्रियाणिरमयते | १६ ।तद्भगवतो

* A mystical syllable sacred to Lord Nrsimha.
