Dis. 56 J BOOK TEN 353

ai ee ee ee eet Te neat eaten ee
जाने त्वां सर्वभूतानां प्राण ओज: सहो बलम्। विष्णुं पुराणपुरुषं प्रभविष्णुमधीश्वरम् 12!
त्वं हि विश्वसृजां ae सृज्यानामपि यच्च सत्। काल: कलयतामीदा: पर आत्मा तथाऽऽत्मनाम् । २७।
सेतु: कृत: स्वयञ्ञ उन्ज्वलिता च लङ्का रक्ष:शिरांसि भुवि पेतुरिषुक्षतानि 1221
इति विज्ञातविज्ञानमृक्षराजानमच्युत: | व्याजहार महाराज भगवान् देवकीसुत: 1281
अभिमृङ्यारविन्दाक्ष: पाणिना a तम्। कृपया परया भक्तं प्रेमगम्भीरया गिरा ।३०॥
मणिहेतोरिह om वयमृक्षपते बिलम्। feted प्रमृजन्नात्मनो मणिनामुना 1३१1
इत्युक्त: स्वां दुहितरं कन्यां जाम्बवतीं wai अर्हणार्थं स मणिना कृष्णायोपजहार ह ।३२॥

The Lord stationed the people outside and entered alone the fearful cave of Jambavan
(the king of bears), covered with thick darkness. (19) Espying there the excellent gem
converted into a toy for an infant, and resolved to carry it away, the Lord waited there by side
of the babe. (20) The nurse shrieked as though afraid to see that wonderful human being (but
really onperceiving the latter's intention tocarry the gem away). Enraged tohearthe scream,
Jambavan, the foremost of the mighty, rushed to meet Him. (21) Thinking Him to be an
ordinary mortal and failing to perceive His greatness (divinity), Jambavan, full of rage,
actually fought with the said almighty Lord, his own Master. (22) A most tumultuous duel
ensued between the two, keen as they were to overthrow each other, like a pair of hawks
contending for a piece of flesh, and fought with weapons (such as a mace), rocks, trees and
(bare) arms and (finally) struck each other with their fists—which fell as severely as the
strokes of lightning. The combat raged day and night without a pause for (as many as) twenty-
eight days. (23-24) Having his many joints and muscles pounded with the strokes of Sri
Krsna's fists and his strength and courage (too) depleted and limbs perspiring (all over),
Jambavan spoke to Him (thus), highly astonished (at this unexpected discomfiture, which he
had never experienced before):—(25) "I (now) conclude You to be (none else than) the all-
powerful Visnu, the most ancient Person, the suzerain Lord, (nay), the life-energy, the
organic power, the strength of mind as well as the bodily strength of all created beings. (26)
Indeed You are the Creator (even) of Brahma and others (the progenitors of the universe),
as well as the Reality that underlies (as the material cause of) evencreated substances (such
as the Mahat-tattva), the Ruler, in the form of the Time-Spirit, of those that control and destroy
others, the supreme Self of (all) embodied souls. (27) (I now understand) You are the same
Lord Ramacandra (my Master) to whom the ocean with its crocodiles and whales thrown into
agitation by Your casting sidelong glances, marked with anger slightly kindled (by its
refractoriness), allowed passage, yet by whoma bridge was constructed (atits own entreaty)
as an embodiment of His own glory, (nay,) by whom (the fortress and city of) Lanka (the
capital of Ravana, His arch-enemy) was set on fire, andsevered by whose (unfailing) arrows
the heads of ogres fell to the ground !" (28) To His devotee, Jambavan (the king of bears),
by whom His identity—which is all-consciouness (and bliss)--was thus directly perceived,
O great king, the lotus-eyed Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) spoke (as follows) ina voice
deep with emotion, stroking him with His soothing hand out of supreme compassion:—(29-30)
"For the sake of this gem did we (ihe leading citizens of Dwaraka headed by Myself) arrive
at (the mouth of) your cave, 0 chief of bears; whereas | came here {inside the cave) with a
view to wiping off the false imputation against Me through that gem." (31) Thus addressed
(by Sri Krsna), he (Jambavan) joyfully gave away by way of worship his own daughter,
Jambavati, alongwith the gem: so the tradition goes. (32)

veg निर्गमं ait: sfager fae जना: । प्रतीक्ष्य द्वादशाहानि दु:खिता: स्वपुरं ययु: ।३३।

