470 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 83

SEER SORE SHEN EEE २ २9 RE 45 ० 8६ 9६ RCE RHRERERRREERERREE न १4 44 4 AREER २२०६ ७ ४७ 4५4 २६५ ७० २२२ २७२

Then the Lord of the Yadus, like the very sun, entered His home, the city of Dwaraka,
whose glories are sung in heaven as well as on earth. The city was specially decorated on
this day with various ornamental arches and streamers which screened off the rays of the
sun, (36) My father honoured all his friends, relations and kinsmen with valuable textiles
and ornaments, beds, seats and other articles. (37) Though my dearest Lord lacks nothing
being complete by Himself (in everyway) and delights only in the Self, yet my father out of
love presented Him with a number of maid-servants, all kinds of wealth, foot-soldiers,
elephants, chariots, horses and many valuable weapons. (O queen !} we must have (in our
previous lives) practised great austerities giving up attachment to all. That is why in this
birth we earned the privilege of actually working as His maid-servants in the household of
our Lord, (38-39)

महिष्य ऊचु:
भोमं fea सगणं युधि तेन रुद्धा ज्ञात्वाथ न: क्षितिजये जितराजकन्या: |
निर्मुच्य संसृतिविमोक्षमनुस्मरन्ती: पादाम्बुजं परिणिनाय य आप्तकाम: ।४०॥
न वयं साध्वि साम्राज्यं स्वाराज्यं भोज्यमप्युत। वैराज्यं oa च आनन्त्यं वा हरे: पदम् ।४१॥
कामयामह एतस्य श्रीमत्पादरज: fra । कुचकुङ्कुमगन्धाढ्यं yet वोढुं गदाभृत: ।॥४२।
safe यद् वाञ्छन्ति पुलिन्द्यस्तृणवीरुध: । गावश्चारयतो गोपा: weet महात्मन: ।४३॥

Rohini (ठा behalf of the sixteen thousand consorts) said: Having conquered many
a king during his expeditions for world conquest, Bhaumasura had made us, their
daughters, captive and kept us confined in his palace. When, having put anend to Bhauma
and all his forces in battle, He came to know of our existence in his palace. He liberated
us and, though Perfect in Himself married us (all), knowing as He did that we ever
contemplated on His lotus- feet, which bring emancipation from the bondage of birth and
death. (40) O virtuous lady, we crave not for universal sovereignty on earth, or for rulership
of the heaven, for the enjoyments attaching to both these positions or for supernatural
powers, for the position of Brahma, or for Liberation or for (the various forms of personal
existence in) the (eternal) abode of God.(41) We (only) desire that we may (continue to)
bear on our head the glorious dust of the lotus-feet of our Lord, which is scented with the
saffron on the bosom of Laksmi (the goddess of wealth). (42) We tong for the touch of the
(sacred) feet of the glorious Lord, which the Gopas and the Gopis, the Bhila women, nay
the very creepers and blades of grass craved for where He tended cows in Vraja (May this
yearning of our heart be fulfilled by the Lord). (43)

Thus ends the eighty-third discourse, in the fatter haif of Book Ten of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PIN Skies
