=I

Dis. 19 ] BOOK FIVE 511

WWE He We RE ० SORT RER ORI CTIINIEE SUICIDE IOI IIIS OIC ini tte trtrtrrtcreetotacteter

sake)—Yourself remaining a mere looker-on. Hail to You, the Witness of (all that is evolved
from) the (three) Gunas as well as of the Karmas (of the various Jivas) ! (38) । bow to that
omnipotent Lord who, having assumed the form of the divine Boar, the Cause of the
universe, and placing me on the end of Your tusk, emerged, through the entire depth of the
Deluge water, from its very bottom, sporting like an elephant after crushing to death in an
encounter the demon (Hiranyaksa) who stood (before Him) as a rival elephant." (39)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled "A description of the terrestrial world"
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

CERT २७२५
PID EELS

अथैकोनविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XIX
The description of Jambidwipa concluded
aye उवाच
नम उपशिक्षितात्मन उपासितलोकायनम: साधुवादनिकषणाच नमो ब्रह्मण्यदेवाय महापुरुषाय महाराजाय
Wa इति । 3
Sri Suka continued : In Kimpurusavarsa that foremost devotee of the Lord, Hanuman,
who takes great pleasure in remaining by the side of his Lord's feet, adores with unremitting
devotion, alongwith the Kimpurusas (the denizens of that Varsa), the most ancient Person
in the form of Lord Sri Rama, elder Brother of Laksmana and the Delighter (Beloved) of
Sita.(1) (There) accompanied by Arstisena (a chief denizen of the Varsa), he listens with
great interest the most auspicious story of his divine Lord, sung by the Gandharvas and
himself repeats the following (prayer):—(2) “Hail to the glorious Lord (Sri Rama), denoted
by the mystical syllable OM ! Hail to Him who is possessed of noble characteristics and an
ideal character and conduct ! Hail to Him who fully disciplined His self (and) followed the
wishes of the people ! Hail to Him who is the (very) touch stone of reputation for goodness !
Hail to the Lord who is resplendent with His devotion to the Brahmana race ! Hail to the
Supreme Person in the form of a great Ruler !" (3)

wae प्रशान्तं सुधियोपलम्भनं ह्यनामरूपं Fe Woy

कुतोऽन्यथा स्याद्रमत: स्व आत्मन: सीताकृतानि व्यसनानीश्वरस्य।५॥
न a स आत्माऽऽत्मवतां सुहृत्तम: सक्तस्तिलोक्यां भगवान् वासुदेव:।
न tite कणष्मलमश्नुवीत न लक्ष्मणं चापि विहातुमर्हति।६।
