. 474 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

CHE BEA HEHE EHEAAEHE HAHAHAHA HERON AEAA LOLS CE RE LEACH LECH HKE SHREK EHH EKA HEH HE HH

the holy Brahmana, who stepped forward only after (carefully) surveying the ground (ahead
of him) up to a distance of three feet only (the standard length of an arrow), king Rahugana,
on finding his palanquin irregularly borne, said to the bearers, "O bearers ! March properly.
Why is the palanquin borne irregularly in this way ?" (2)

अथ a ईश्वरवच: Woerwrvatoaqianrsigaaed विज्ञापयाम्बभूबु: 131
Now, on hearing the reproachful words of their master and afraid at heart of punishment
(the last of the four methods of correcting a man, viz., conciliation, gift, sowing seeds of
dissension, and coercion), they submitted to him (as follows) :— (3)
न वयं नरदेव प्रमत्ता भवन्नियमानुपथा: साध्वेव वहाम: | अवमधुनैव नियुक्तोऽपि न द्रुतं व्रजति नानेन
सह वोढुमु ह वयं पारयाम इति। ४। 7
"We are not remiss, O ruler of men; (strictly) obeying your commands, we bear the
palanquin quite well. Though engaged just now, this (new) man does not walk quickly. We
are, therefore, unable to bear the palanquin with him." (4)
राजा रहूगण उपासितवृद्धोऽपि निसर्गेण बलात्कृत ईंषदुत्थितमन्युरविस्पष्टव्रह्मतेजसं जातवेदसमिव
रजसाऽऽवृतमतिराह। G1 अहो HE भ्रातर्व्यक्तमुरु परिश्रान्तो दीर्घमध्वानमेक wa ऊहिवान् सुचिरं
रचितद्रव्यगुणकर्मांशयस्वचरमकलेवरेऽवस्तुनि संस्थानविशेषेऽहं ममेत्यनध्यारोपितमिथ्याप्रत्ययो
ब्रह्मभूतस्तूष्णीं शिबिकां पूर्ववदुवाह | ६ |
Hearing (their) piteous words,king Rahigana concluded that the fault appearing in one
through contact (with others) is sure to become the fault of all who are connected with that
person. Even though he had sat at the feet of sages, his Ksatriya spirit prevailed over him.
His judgment having been clouded by the element of Rajas, he felt a bit enraged and spoke
(ironically as follows) to that Brahmana, whose spiritual glory was not distinctly perceived
like (the brilliance of) fire (embers) covered with ashes :— (5) "Whata pity, brother ! You are
evidently very tired, (it seems) you have borne the palanquin single-handed all this long way
(and) forlong hours (too) and none of these other associates (ofyours), O friend, have shared
your burden (at all). (Besides) you are neither very stout nor possessed of an adamantine
frame and are oppressed with old age (too)." Even when taunted unsparingly in this way, the
sage, who had become one with the Infinite and never entertained the false notion of ` or
‘mine’ with regard to his ultimate body—which was nothing but a concatenation of various
limbs put together in a particular disposition, consisting as it did of the five gross elements,
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the
(impressions of) past actions (both meritorious and sinful) and the mind (the seat or
storehouse of such impressions), evolved by ignorance, and (therefore) unreal —quietly bore
the palanquin (even) as before. (6)
aa पुन: स्वशिबिकायां विषमगतायां प्रकुपित उवाच रहूगण: किमिदमरे त्वं जीवन्मृतो at `
कदर्थीकृत्य भर्तृशासनमतिचरसि प्रमत्तस्य च ते करोमि चिकित्सां दण्डपाणिरिव जनताया यथा प्रकृतिं स्वां
भजिष्यस gfe | ७1
King Rahdgana, however, flew into a rage on his palanquin being borne irregularly again,
and said,"Oh, what does this mean ? Though living, you are (as good as) dead in that you
ignore me (my presence) and transgress the commands of your lord. | shall accordingly
correct you, perverse as you are—even as Yama (the god of punishment) chastises the
people—so that you may recover your senses." (7) तं - ।
एवं बह्वबद्धमपि भाषमाणं नरदेवाभिमानं रजसा तमसानुविद्धेन मदेन तिरस्कृताशेषभगवत्प्रियनिकेतं
पण्डितमानिनं स भगवान् ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मभूत: सर्वभूतसुहृदात्मा योगेश्वरचर्यायां नातिव्युत्पन्नमतिं स्मयमान
इव विगतस्मय इदमाह । ८1
