86 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22 22

TRARKHESLSLE KEM LARA NH ESSER L SAA HAT eee च व ee eee EK HEK heehee heh

तवेमे तनयास्तात जनमेजयपूर्वका: । श्रुतसेनो भीमसेन उग्रसेनश्च वीर्यवान् ।३५॥
जनमेजयस्त्वां विदित्वा तक्षकान्निधनं गतम् । सर्पान् वै सर्पयागाम्नो स होष्यति रुषान्वित: । ३६॥
कावषेयं पुरोधाय तुरं तुरगमेधयाद्।समन्तात्पृथिवीं सर्वां जित्वायक्ष्यतिचाध्वरै: ।३७॥
Te पुत्र: शतानीको याज्ञवल्क्यात् त्रयीं पठन्। अस्त्रज्ञानं क्रियाज्ञानं sie परमेष्यति । ३८1
सहस्रानीकस्तत्पुत्रस्ततश्चैवाश्वमेधज: । असीमकृष्णस्तस्यापि नेमिचक्रस्तु तत्सुत: । ३९॥
Taga हते नद्या कौझाम्ब्यां साधु वत्स्यति । उक्तस्ततश्चित्ररथस्तस्मात् कविरथ: सुत: ।॥४०॥
तस्माच्च वृष्टिमांस्तस्य सुषेणोऽथ महीपति: । सुनीथस्तस्य भविता नृचक्षुर्यत् सुखीनल: ।४१॥
alga: सुतस्तस्मान्मेधावी सुनयात्मज:। नृपञ्जयस्ततो दूर्वस्तिमिस्तस्माज्जनिष्यति ives
तिमेर्वृहद्रथस्तस्माच्छतानीक: सुदासज: । शतानीकाद् दुर्दमनस्तस्यापत्यं बहीनर: ।४३॥
दण्डपाणिर्निमिस्तस्य क्षेमको भविता नृप: । ब्रह्मक्षत्रस्य वै प्रोक्तो dan देवर्षिसत्कृत: rsx
क्षेमकं प्राप्य राजानं संस्थां प्राप्त्यति वै कलौ । अथ मागधराजानो भवितारो वदामि ते ।४५॥
Here are your (own) sons, O dear Pariksit—Janamejaya and others following him, (viz.,)
Srutasena, Bhimasena and Ugrasena; each of them possessed of (great) valour. (35)
Perceiving you to have met your death through (the serpent) Taksaka, the said Janamejaya,
full of rage, will (attract by means of spells and) actually offer serpents as an oblation to the
flames in a serpent-sacrifice. Having conquered the entire globe on all sides and appointing
Tura, the son of Kavasa, as his priest, Janamejaya, (who will be celebrated as) a performer
of horse-sacrifices, will propitiate the Lord through a number of (such) sacrifices. (36-37) His
son, Satanika, will learn the three Vedas and receive the knowledge of rituals from the sage
Yajfiavalkya and acquire knowledge of (the use of) missiles (from Krpacarya) and will attain
the highest knowledge (knowledge of the Self) from the sage Saunaka. (38) Satanika's son
will be Sahasranika, and of him will be born ASwamedhaja. His son, again, will be
Asimakrsna, whose son on the other hand will be Nemicakra. (39) On Hastinapura being
washed away by the river (Ganga) he will duly settle down in (the city of )KauSamb!. The son
sprung from his loins is called Citraratha, and of him will be borna sonnamed Kaviratha.(40)
From him, again, will follow Vrstiman, whose son, Susena, of course will be aking. His son
will be Sunitha and Sunitha’s son will be Nrcaksu, from whom will follow Sukhinala. (41) His
son will be Pariplava, from whom will follow Sunaya and his son will be Medhavi. Medhavi's
son will be Nrpaiijaya, of whom will be born Diirva and from (the loins of) the latter will appear
Timi. (42) Timi’s son will be Brhadratha, from whom will follow Sudasa, and his son will be
Satanika. From (the loins of) Satanika will appear Durdamana, whose sonwillbe Vahinara. (43)
From Vahinara will follow Dandapani and of Dandap&ni will be born Nimi, whose son
Ksemaka will be a ruler of men. An account of the line of Piru, from which sprang up races
of (both) Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, and which is esteemed by gods and Rsis (alike), has
indeed been told (by me). (44) Having reached up to Ksemaka, this line as a matter of fact
will come to an end in (the age of) Kali. Now, | shall enumerate the future kings of Magadha
(South Bihar). (45)

भविता सहदेवस्य मार्जारिर्यच्छुतश्रवा: | ततोऽयुतायुस्तस्यापि निरमित्रोऽथ तत्सुत: ॥४६॥
सुनक्षत्र: Wem बृहत्सेनोऽथ adi aa: सृतञ्जयाद fas: शुचिस्तस्य भविष्यति 1४७॥
क्षेमोऽथ सुव्रतस्तस्माद् धर्मसूत्र: wea: द्युमत्सेनोऽथ सुमति: सुबलो जनिता तत: ।४८॥
सुनीथ: सत्यजिदथ विश्वजिद् ae रिपुञ्जय: । बार्हद्रथाश्च भूपाला भाव्या: साहस्रवत्सरम् ।॥४९॥
