362 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 58

SRAM MREN NER RESTORE RERTRCR ROR, SSE BB SOS SRT TRE EET SEE REE  E I IO  2EEERE OR R er RT

Vinda and Anuvinda, the rulers of Avanti (the modern Ujjain), who followed the will of
Duryodhana, deterred their sister, who was devoted to Sri Krsna, from making her own
choice (in a gathering of princes invited for the purpose). (30) Sri Krsna (however) forcibly
snatched away Mitravinda (as such was her name), daughter of Rajadhidevi (His own
father's sister*), in the midst of (other) princes, who stood gazing (helplessly), O king ! (31)

नद्जजिन्नाम कौसल्य आसीद् राजातिधार्मिक: | तस्य सत्याभवत् कन्या देवी नाम्नजिती नृप 132
न तां taeda वोढुमजित्का wa गोवृषान् । त्तीक्ष्णशृङ्गान् सुदुर्धर्षान्वीरगन्घासहान् खलान् ।३३॥
at gen वृषजिल्लभ्यां भगवान् सात्वतां पति: । जगाम कौसल्यपुरं सैन्येन महता ga: ।३४॥
स कोसलपति: प्रीत: प्रत्युत्थानासनादिभि: । अर्हणेनापि गुरुणा पूजयन् प्रतिनन्दित: ।३५॥
भूयादयं मे पतिराशिषोऽमला: करोतु wen ae मे धृतो wa ।३६॥
लीलातनू: स्वकृतसेतुपरीप्सयेश: काले दधत् स भगवान् मम केन तुष्येत् ।३७॥
aft पुनरित्याह नारायण जगत्पते। आत्मानन्देन पूर्णस्य करवाणि किमल्पक: ।३८॥

There was a very pious king of Kosala, Nagnajit by name. He had a brilliant daughter,
Satya, nicknamed Nagnajiti (after the name of her father), 0 Pariksit ! (32) Princes could not
win her without subduing seven excellent, though wicked, bulls with pointed horns, that were
most formidable and could not bear (even) the smell of heroes. (33) Hearing that she could
be gained (only) by one who was able to subdue the bulls, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of
the Yadus), accompanied by a huge army, drove to Ayodhya (the capital of the kings of
Kosala). (34) Full of delight, the said king of Kosala was hailed with joy (by Sri Krsna) while
welcoming Him by going forth to meet Him, offering Him a (high) seat and valuable articles
of worship too. (35) Beholding Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi)—who was not only after her
heart but was worth wooing (in every way)—arrived in state, the princess sought Him (as her
husband) and prayed (as follows):—"If He has been (constantly) cherished by meas the goal
of mysacred vows, let Him grant my innocent prayers and be my husband. (36) Through what
effort (of mine) can that almighty Lord be pleased with me, the dust of whose lotus-feet do
Laksmi (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) and Brahma (the lotus-born) as well as Lord
Siva (who dwells on Mount Kailasa) and the (other) guardians of the world bear on their head,
and who assumes from time to time embodied (divine) forms suited to His (various) pastimes
with intent to maintain the standards of morality set up by Himself.” (37) To Sri Krsna, who
had now been (duly) worshipped, the king (of Kosala) spoke as follows:—"O Narayana, O
Lord of the universe what can I, an extremely poor fellow, do for You, sated as You are with
the Bliss of Your very Self ? (38)

श्रीगुक उवाच
तमाह भगवान् we: कृतासनपरिग्रह: । मेघगम्भीरया वाचा सस्मितं कुरुनन्दन ।३९॥
Sti Suka continued : Full of delight, the Lord, who had (now) taken His seat,

smilingly replied to him in a voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud (as follows), O scion
of Kuru ! (39)

१ SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSE

* Vide IX. xxiv. 30.
