90 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24

RERALARELESHAEREHAEEELERELELELER ER CHRPEEAEES CHEESE SESE REARS EORENSHAECEE EEE HAE HHH

glory of the sage Aurva). (28) The eldest of Talajangha’s sons was Vitihotra, whose son was
Madhu and.Madhu's son was called Vrsni. in facthe had a hundred sons, of whom Vrsni was
the eldest. It was to these (viz., Yadu, Madhu and Vrsni) that the Yadava race owed its
existence and (again) it was due to them that their descendants became known as the
Yadavas, the Madhavas and the Vrsnis (as time went on), O king ! The son of Krostu, the
(second) son of Yadu was Vrjinavan, of whom was born Swahi. From the latter indeed
followed Rugeku, whose son was Citraratha and from the (loins of the) latter sprang up
Sagabindu, a great mystic, who had extensive enjoyments and was exalted (in point of
virtues). (29—31) He was possessed of (all) the fourteen* varieties of excellent jewels, ruled
over the entire globe and was invincible. Through his ten thousand wives that exceedingly
renowned emperor begot a thousand million sons (alakh through each). Of those (thousand
million) sons, of whom six (viz., Prthugrava and others) were the foremost. The son of
Prthusrava was Dharma by name, whose son was Usana, who performed a hundred horse-
sacrifices. His son was Rucaka, who had five sons. (Please) hear of them. (32—34) They
bore the names of Purujit, Rukma, Rukmesu, Prthu and Jyamagha. Even though issueless,

Jyamagha, the husband of Saibya, dared not take another woman to wife for (sheer) fear
(of Saibya). On one occasion (however, having conquered his enemies) he brought as a
booty from the enemy's house a princess of the Bhoja dynasty (called Bhojya).t Observing
her seated in the (king's) chariot, Saibya indignantly spoke to her husband straight in the
following words:—(35-36) “O traitor, who is this girl made to occupy this chariot meant for
me?" When the reply came, "She is your daughter-in-law,” she similingly rejoined, "| am a
barren woman and have no co-wife either; how could there be a daughter-in-law tome?" The
king replied, "She will prove a suitable match, O queen, for the boy whom you will bear."(37-38)
The ViSwedevas as well as the manes (took pity on Jyamagha, who was shaking and
perspiring too all over through fear of his wife, and) heartily approved of his words so that
Queen Saibya conceived not long afterwards and gave birth to a handsome male child. He
was called by the name of Vidarbha and married that chaste girl, who had already been
accepted as a daughter-in-law (by his parents). (39)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Nine of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

wit
eI

१११०

* In the Markandeya-Purana, we find mention of the following fourteen varieties of jewels, viz., the elephant, horse,
chariot, woman, arrow, treasury, a wreath of flowers, raiment, a tree, Sakti (@ javelin), noose, gem, umbrella andan aerial car:-—
गजवाजिरधस्त्रौषुनिधिमाल्याम्बरद्रुमा: । शक्तिपाशमणिच्छत्रविमानानि चतुर्दश॥
+ Among the Ksatriyas it hes been customary to callamarried woman in the house of herhusband by the
family name of her father.
