656 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29

AHH EN EHH NEKO KN PNTET KEKE Kee RENE te मा कक सा क न ०969 ७स #8 ४9 #2#.# ८४ ७४७ ककग8 न 54 474

न ह्यङ्गोषक्रमे eal मद्धर्मस्योद्धवाण्वपि । मया व्यवसित: सम्यङ्निर्गुणत्वादनाशिष? । २०।
यो यो ofa ot धर्म: कल्प्यते निष्फलाय चेत् । तदायासो निरर्थ: स्याद् भयादेरिव सत्तम ।२१।
एषा बुद्धिमतां बुद्धिर्मनीषा च मनीषिणाम्। यत् सत्यमनृतेनेह मर्त्यनाम्नोति मामृतम् । २२॥

The glorious Lord said: Hullo ! | shalt tell you the most auspicious courses of conduct
pleasing to Me, following which with reverence a mortal conquers death, which is so difficult
to conquer.(8) With mind and intellect dedicated to Me and his mind and soul finding delight
in the courses of conduct pleasing to Me, aman should gradually (learn to) perform all actions
for My sake, remembering Me (all the while). (9) He should take up his abode in holy lands
inhabited by pious men devoted to Me and follow the conduct of my devotees among the
gods, demons and human beings. (10) He should arrange (either) individually or collectively
in My honour on sacred days (such as Ekadasi) processions and great festivities alongwith
songs, dances etc., spending large sums of money on a monarchical scale. (11) Pure of
mind, he should behold Me alone, the Supreme Self, as pervading within as well as without
and unconditioned as the sky in all created beings as also in his own self. (12) He who,
embracing thus the point of view of Self-Knowledge alone, regards all created beings as
identical with Me, O highly entightened one, and honours them as such, (nay,) who looks with
an equal eye upon a Brahmana and a low-born individual, a thief and a devotee of
Brahmanas, the sun and a spark, a tender-hearted and a cruel man is accounted wise. (13-14)
(The spirit of) rivalry (withequals), fault-finding (with one's superiors) and contempt (for one's
inferiors) coupled with self-conceit surely disappear before long from the mind of a man
incessantly (engaged in) looking upon men and women as (no other than) Myself. (15)
tgnoring his own people (even) if they laugh at him and giving up the body-consciousness
(as a result of which one comes to regard oneself as superior and the low-born and animals
etc., as inferior to one's own self) and casting to the winds (all sense of) shame, he should
bow low to all down to a dog, a pariah, a cow and a donkey, falling flat on the ground like a
log of wood. (16) Until the conviction about all created beings being identical with Myself gets
rooted in him, he should worship Me in the aforesaid manner through the active agency of
his speech, mind and body. (17) Everything is reduced to Brahma (the Absotute) in his eyes.
(And) seeing Brahma (and Brahma alone) everywhere by virtue of knowledge (raised to the
level of realization) gained by looking upon everything as Brahma, and freed from all doubts,
he shoutd cease from all activity. (18) Looking upon all created beings as Myself through the
active agency of mind, speech and body—this indeed is considered by Me to be the best of
all disciplines (conducive to My realization). (19) There is no (fear of) loss in the least degree
of this course of conduct in the lorm of My worship, O dear Uddhava, once it has been taken
up (in right earnest), because it is free from (all) craving and since it has been deliberately
determined by Me, unaffected as tt is by the (three) Gunas. (20) (Nay.) whatever worldly
exertion, though fruitless (e.g., the act of fleeing and crying through fear etc.), yet dedicated
inadisinterested spirit to Me, the Supreme, is exalled to the level of Dharma (righteousness),
O most pious Uddhava | (21) Here lies the wisdom of Ihe wise, (nay,) the cleverness of the
clever consists in this (alone) that one attains in this (very) life to Me, the (only) immortal and
real substance, through this bogus and mortal frame. (22)

ua तेऽभिहित: कृत्स्नो ब्रह्मवादस्य सङ्ग्रह: | समासव्यासविधिना देवानामपि दुर्गम: 1231
अभीक्ष्णशस्ते गदितं ज्ञानं विस्पष्टयुक्तिमत्। ude विज्ञाय मुच्येत geal नष्टसंदाय: ।२४॥
सुविविक्तं तव sel मयैतदपि धारयेत्। सनातनं ब्रह्मगुह्यं परं ब्रह्याधिगच्छति । २५॥
य एतन्मम भक्तेषु सम्प्रदद्यात् सुपुष्कलम्।ततस्याहं ब्रह्मदायस्य ददाम्यात्मानमात्मना । २६॥
य wd समधीयीत पवित्रं परमं gaia पूयेताहरहर्मां ज्ञानटीपेन aia ।२७॥
