2 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

srterereesesrersrreecerecectroennrernnentenresersprervenrs enrt eeenerwnnpen sheet nr
ART उवाच
gaat मानवो वंश: प्राचयुर्येण परंतप। न शाक्यते विस्तरतो ab वर्षशतैरपि । ७ ।
परावरेषां भूतानामात्मा य: पुरुष: पर: । स एवासीदिदं fad कल्पान्तेऽन्यन्न किञ्चन । ८ 1
तस्य नाभे: समभवत् ween हिरण्मय: । तस्मिञ्जज्ने महाराज स्वयंभूश्चतुरानन: । ९ ।

१२१०

मरीचिर्मनसस्तस्य जज्ञे तस्यापि कर्यप: | दाक्षायण्यां ततोऽदित्यां विवस्वानभवत् qa: 1201
ततो मनु: श्राद्धदेव: संज्ञायामास भारत | श्रद्धायां जनयामास दश पुत्रान् स आत्मवान् । ११॥
। नरिष्यन्तं geet च नभगं च कविं fay: 1921

Sri Suka began again: Hear an account of the posterity of (Vaivaswata) Manu in its
important aspects, O chastiser of foes! It cannot be narrated in extenso even in the course
of hundreds of years. (7) During the period of (final) dissolution Lord Narayana (the supreme
Person) alone, the inner Controller and Sustainer of (all) created beings (high and low),
represented this universe; nothing else existed (at that time). (8) From His navel sprang up
the calyx of a golden lotus and in that calyx, O great king, appeared the four-faced Brahma
(the self-born). (9) From the latter's mind came forth Marici and from (the loins of ) Marici,
again, appeared the sage Kasyapa. And of Kasyapa by Aditi, a daughter of Daksa, was born
a son, Vivaswan (the sun-god). (10) Of the latter by his wife, Sarhjfa, O scion of Bharata,
was born Sraddhadeva, the Manu (presiding over the current Manvantara); and through (his
wife) Sraddha, the high-minded King Sraddhadeva begot ten sons—Ikswaku, Nrga, Saryati,
Dista, Dhrsta, Karusaka, Narisyanta, Prsadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi. (11-12)

अप्रजस्य मनो: पूर्वं वसिष्ठो भगवान् किल । मित्रावरुणयोरिष्टिं प्रजार्थमकरोत् प्रभु: 1231
तत्र श्रद्धा मनो: पत्नी होतारं समयाचत । दुहित्रर्थमुपागम्य प्रणिपत्य पयोव्रता ex
प्रेषितोऽध्वर्युणा होता ध्यायंस्तत् सुसमाहित: । हविषि व्यचरत् तेन वषट्कारं गृणन्दिज: । १५॥
होतुस्तद्व्यभिचारेण eater aa साभवत्। at विलोक्य मनु: we नातिहृष्टमना गुरुम् । १६॥
भगवन् किमिदं जातं कर्म at ब्रह्मवादिनाम् । विपर्ययमहो ee मैवं ee ब्रह्मविक्रिया । १७॥
qa मन्त्रविदो युक्तास्तपसा दग्धकिल्बिषा:। ga: संकल्पवैषम्यमनृतं विब्रुधेष्निव । १८॥
तन्निशाम्य वचस्तस्य भगवान् प्रपितामह: । होतुर्व्यतिक्रमं ज्ञात्वा बभाषे रविनन्दनम् ।१९॥
एतत् संकल्पवैषम्यं होतुस्ते व्यभिचारत: । तथापि साधयिष्ये ते सुप्रजास्त्वं स्वतेजसा 1201
एवं व्यवसितो राजन् भगवान् स महायशा: । अस्तौषीदादिपुरुषमिलाया: पुंस्त्वकाप्यया । २१1
तस्मै कामवरं तुष्टो भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: । ददाविलाभवत् तेन सुद्युम्न: पुरुषर्षभ: ।२२॥

In the beginning (before Ikswaku and others were born) the glorious and powerful sage
Vasistha (the preceptor of the solar race), it is said, conducted a sacrifice in propitiation of
the gods Mitra and Varuna* for the sake of a son to the Manu, who was (yet) issueless. (13)
During that sacrificial performance the Manu's wife, Sraddha, who was subsisting on milk
alone, approached the priest invoking the gods and reciting the Rgveda and, falling prostrate
before him, humbly requested him to conduct the sacrifice in such a way as to ensure the
birth of a daughter. (14) On the oblation tobe poured into the sacred fire having been taken
in the hand (for being thrown), the Brahmana officiating as the Hota, who was thinking (ai)
the time of the request made by the queen) and repeating the mystic word 'Vasat’, propitiated
the fire with a fully controlled mind by means of that oblation, as directed by the
Adhwaryu.(15) Due to the aforesaid deviation made by the Hota the offspring turned out to

* The Sruti recommends the performance of a sacrifice in honour of the gods Mitra and Varuna for those desiring to tave
a son in the following अणतऽ:-`मैत्रावरुणीमिष्टि कुर्यात् पुत्रकाम:`।
