770 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

ERA SHORE KEEN SETH HAOKE KE SHOHELEHAREKCEHKE SENSE EERE LKELALENH EAE ERASE AHHH NERA

had (already) taken Her (permanent) abode in the auspicious bosom of Sri Hari, moved
about (in search of a match of Her choice).(17) Having a pair of symmetrical and closely set
breasts, painted with sandal-paste and saffron, and marked with an exceedingly slender
waist and moving hither and thither (in that distinguished assemblage) accompanied by the
sweet jingling of anklets, She shone like a (mobile) creeper of gold. (18) Looking out among
the Gandharvas, Yaksas, Asuras, Siddhas, Caranas, gods (lit., the denizens of heaven) and
others for a husband for Her—a husband free from blemish, eternal and possessed of
everlasting virtues, She did not find any. (19) (She said to Herself:—)"There is no full control
of anger in him of whom asceticism can be surely predicated. (Likewise) wisdom is found in
some individuals; but it is not free from attachment. A third one is great (no doubt); but there
is no complete mastery of concupiscence in him. And how can he be a lord, who depends
(for his existence and power) on another ? (20) There is righteousness in some; but there
is no love for living beings in them. (Again) there is liberality in some individuals; but in their
case it is not conducive to Liberation (their liberality being actuated by some interested
motives). (Similarly) there is prowess in a certain individual; but it is not immune from the
ravages of Time. (And) surely he who is (entirely) free from attachment to the objects of
senses cannot be a (fit) companion (inasmuch as he will choose to remain absorbed in
abstract meditation and will have nothing to do with me). (21) There is long life in some; but
there is no amiability nor auspiciousness (of the kind coveted by women ). In some (others)
there is amiability and auspiciousness too; but the duration of their life cannot be (easily)
known. In some rare individual both these qualities (longevity as well as amiability) exist; but
he too is inauspicious (in outward conduct). (Of course) there is one who is very auspicious
too (besides being long-lived and amiable); but he does not long for me." (22)

एवं विमृहयाव्यभिचारिसद्गुणैर्वरं निजैकाश्रयतागुणाश्रयम् ।
वव्रे oat सर्वगुणैरपेक्षितं रमा मुकुन्दं निरपेक्षमीप्सितम् । २३|
तस्यांसदेश उशतो नवकञ्जमालां माद्यन्मधुव्रतवरूथगिरोपधघुष्टाम् ।

wet निधाय निकटे तदुर: स्वधाम सव्रीडहासविकसन्नयनेन याता । २४॥
तस्या: श्रियस्रिजगतो जनको जनन्या वक्षोनिवासमकरोत् परमं विभूते: ।

oft: स्वा: प्रजा: सकरुणेन निरीक्षणेन aa स्थितॆधयत साधिपतींस्रिलोकान् । २५॥
शङ्खतूर्यमृदङ्गानां वादित्राणां yy: स्वन: । देवानुगानां सस्त्रीणां नृत्यतां गायतामभूत् । २६॥
ब्रह्मरुद्राङ्गिरोमुख्या: wa विश्वसृजो विभुम्। ईडिरिऽवितथैर्मन्त्रस्तलिङ्गै: पुष्पवर्षिण: 1291
श्रिया बिलोकिता देवा: सप्रजापतय: प्रजा: । शीलादिगुणसम्पन्ना लेभिरे निर्वृतिं पराम् । २८॥
नि:सत्त्वा लोलुपा राजन् निरुद्योगा गतत्रपा: । यदा चोपॆक्षिता meen बभूवुर्दैत्यदानवा: ।२९॥

Having thus deliberated, Goddess Rama (Laksmi) chose for Her husband (none other
than) Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation), the most worthy of all from the point of view
of His everlasting virtues (such as righteousness and wisdom) and (absolute) independ-
ence, who is beyond the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and was coveted by Her, nay,
who is wooed by all excellences, even though He does not feel interested in anyone. (23)
Placing on His shoulders the charming wreath of fresh lotuses resonant with the humming
of swarms of maddening black-bees, and having attained to His bosom, Her own
(permanent) abode, through Her (lotus-like) eyes blooming with a bashful smile, she stood
by His side (awaiting His grace as it were). (24) Lord Visnu (the Father of the three worlds)
made His bosom the permanent abode of Goddess Sri, the Mother of the three worlds and.
