Dis. 26 ] "BOOK FIVE 544

SREHKEAHAHEKSHCHAHKEKESEHAAKATE SLEEVE EHESCHLELEAH AHL CHE ESE HOT MAAN A EMAAR AHHH ज्जी
त्तज

un ह्येवेह नृभिरुपगन्तव्या गतयो यथाकर्मविनिर्मिता यथोपदेशमनुवर्णिता: कामान्
कामयमानै:!। १४॥ एतावतीर्हि राजन् पुंस: प्रवृत्तिलक्षणस्य धर्मस्य विपाकगतय उच्ञावचा
विसदृशा यथाप्रश्नं व्याचख्ये किमन्यत्कथयाम इति। १५ ।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे भूविवरविध्युपवर्णनं नाम पञ्चविंशोऽध्याय:। २५ । .
These indeed are the only destinations (regions) in this universe to be reached (as a
reward for merit) by men—seeking (their) desired blessings—according to (the nature of
their) actions, and created (by God). They have been described (by me) as | was taught (by
my revered father and preceptor, the sage Vedavyasa). (14) | have described at length, in
response to your queries, the diverse destinies (both) high and low, reached as a reward of
virtue in the form of activity practised by man, which are only somany, O king, (Pariksit)! What
else shall we discourse upon? (15)

Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse entitled "A supplement to the description of the
subterranean system" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SPER र्या ११
।सत्जिङ्गिहिरस्हिद्नत्

अथ षड्विंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXVI
A description of the infernal regions
राजोवाच
Tet एतद्वैचित्र्रं लोकस्य कथमिति।१।
The king (Pariksit) asked : Howis this heterogeneity in the universe (to be accounted

for), O great sage? (1)
ऋषिरुवाच

त्रिगुणत्वात्कर्तु: श्रद्धया कर्मगतय: पृथग्विधा: सर्वा va सर्वस्य तारतम्येन भवन्ति। 21 अथेदानीं
कृतकामानां तत्परिणामलक्षणा: FIA: सहस्ररश: प्रवृत्तास्तासां प्राचुर्येणानुवर्णयिष्याम: | ३।

The sage (Sri Suka) replied : A doer being swayed by (one of) the three Gunas (modes
of Prakrti), the destinies reached through the various actions (done by him) vary according
to the (nature of) faith (by which those actions are prompted, and which is also of three kinds
according as itis Sattvika, Rajasika or Tamasika in character), and all (those) destinies are
attained, more or less, by everyone (at different times). (2) Exactly in the same way, the fruit
of action accruing to a perpetrator of sin—which is (only) distinguished by the interdiction
attaching thereto—varies according to the diverse types of faith. Accordingly, we shall now
describe the more prominent of the thousands of (infernal) states, ordained by God, and
resulting from sins committed by those who cherish desires (of various kinds) through (the
darkness of) ignorance prevailing (in their heart) from time without beginning. (3)

राजोवाच
Wet नाम wey fh देशविशेषा agar बहिस्तरिलोक्या आहोस्विदन्तराल six

The king inquired : Are the infernal regions referred to by you, O divine sage, particular
sports on the face of the earth or are they located outside the egg-shaped universe or inside
it (between some spheres)? (4)
