252 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 36

GARI SOR AIORIOR RAIMI ttt Qin toh 8 2 ee den rte tot fee Pore er eet gtd ti ee eR a RE

might, of the wicked and evil-minded like you !” Slapping His arms (by way of challenge to
a duel) and provoking Arista by means of the sound produced thereby, the immortal Sri Hari
stood stretching His serpent-like arm on the shoulder of a boy companion. Thus angered,
the aforesaid Arista too rushed towards Sri Krsna in fury, furrowing the earth with his hoofs,
the clouds dispersing at the touch of his erect tail. (8-9) With the ends of his horns thrust
forward and his bloodshot eyes remaining winkless the animal darted forthwith towards Sri
Krsna even like the thunderbolt hurled by Indra, threatening Him with his side-glances. (10)
Seizing him by the horns, the Lord actually pushed him back, like an elephant driving a rival
elephant, to a distance of eighteen steps. (11) Knocked down by the Lord, the bull quickly
rose again and, filled with fury, rushed forward sweating all over and breathing hard. (12)
Seizing tightly the demon by the horns, even as he came rushing, and throwing him to the
ground, the Lord set His foot on him and (pressing him at one end with His feet) wrung him
evenasa drenched cloth; and (then) pulling his horn struck him with it till he fell prostrate.(13)
Vomiting blood, discharging urine and dung profusely and throwing up his feet with his eyes
rolling, the demon experienced (great) agony and (eventually) met his end at the hands of
Death (himself in the disguise of Sri Krsna, the Destroyer of Death). The gods (in heaven)
applauded Sri Hari, covering Him with flowers. (14) Having thus disposed of the (demon in
the form ofa) bull and being glorified by His own kinsmen (the cowherds), Sri Krsna (the feast
of the Gopis' eyes) accompanied by Bala (who had joined him on hearing of his encounter
with the bull) entered Vraja (once more). (15)

अरिष्टे fet दैत्यै कृष्णेनाद्भुतकर्मणा । कंसायाथाह भगवान् नारदो देवदर्शन: 1261

यञ्ञोदाया: सुतां कन्यां देवक्या: कृष्णमेव च । रामं च रोहिणीपुत्रं वसुदेवेन बिभ्वता 1१७1

न्यस्तौ स्वमित्रे नन्दे वै याभ्यां ते पुरुषा हता: । Pera तद् भोजपति: कोपात् प्रचलितेन्दिय: । १८1

निशातमसिमादत्त वसुदेवजिघांसवा । निवारितो नारदेन तत्सुतौ मृत्युमात्मन: ।१९॥

ज्ञात्वा लोहमयै: oder we भार्यया । प्रतियाते तु देवर्षौ he आभाष्य केशिनम् । २०॥

प्रेषयामास हन्येतां भवता रामकेशवौ। ततो मुष्टिकचाणूरशलतोशलकादिकान् । २१॥

ama, हस्तिपांश्चैव समाहूयाह भोजराद्। भो भो निशम्यतामेतद् वीरचाणूरमुष्टिकौ 1221

नन्दव्रजे किलासाते सुतावानकदुन्दुभे: । रामकृष्णौ ततो मह्यं मृत्यु: किल निदर्शित: 1221

भवद्भ्यामिह सम्प्राप्तौ हन्येतां मल्ललीलया | wan: क्रियन्तां विविधा मल्लरङ्गपरिश्रिता: |

पौरा जानपदा: सर्वे पङ्यन्तु स्वैरसंयुगम् । २४

महामात्र त्वया भद्र रङ्गद्वार्युपनीयताम्।द्विप: कुवलयापीडो जहि तेन ममाहितौ 1२५॥

आरभ्यतां धनुर्यागश्चतुर्दश्याँ यथाविधि । विद्यसन्तु पद्मून् मेध्यान् भूतराजाय मीढुषे । २६॥

The demon Arista having been slain by Sri Krsna of miraculous deeds, the holy Narada,
who was gifted with divine vision, presently (called on and) told Karhsa of the female child .
(which was supposed to be the eighth progeny of Devaki and had escaped death* at his
hands) being (as a matter of fact) a daughter of YaSoda, as well as of Sri Krsna being the
(eighth) offspring of Devaki, and of Balarama being a son of Rohini as also of the two
Brothers—by whom Karhsa‘s men (agents) had been actually made short work of—having
been placed by the terrified Vasudeva (Their real father) in the charge of his friend, Nanda,

Karnsa, the chief of the Bhojas, whose mind was agitated through anger to hear this
(revelation), snatched a sharp-edged sword with the intention of killing Vasudeva. Stopped

a
* Vide verses 7 to 13 of Discourse IV.
