502 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17

व री दौ ने र्व्य द् वी प्रित् छ ॐ क ज्झ कक ESE LEE HELE HERE ETH EEK ELEH EEE EH ES HT HKEE TERE EAHA HSE

ocean on the west. (7) Descending from the summit of Mount Meru ina northerly direction
and leaving one mountain-peak after another, the Bhadra flows from the peak of Sragavan
in the direction of the northern Kurus and enters the oceanin the north. (8) Even so flowing
to the south of Brahma’s city (on Mount Meru) and passing through many a mountain-peak,
the Alakananda reaches the mountain-range of Hemakita and, rolling down from
Hemakuta to the peaks of the Himalaya mountain with a tremendous speed and coursing
through Bharatavarsa, enters the ocean in the south. And for a man who goes forth to
bathe in this river, the reward of ASwamedha, Rajastya and other (great) sacrifices
becomes easy of access at every step. (9) There are in every Varsa (subdivision of
Jambidwipa) hundreds of other rivers, both big and small, having their source in Mount
Meru and other mountains. (10)

व्यपदिशन्ति। ११ | wy Cape देवकल्पानां नागायुतप्राणानां
वज्रसंहननबलवयोमोदप्रमुदितमहासौरतमिथुनव्यवायापवर्गवर्षधृतैकगर्भकलत्राणां AT तु त्रेतायुगसम: कालो
Add १२। यन्र ह देवपतय: wa: स्वैर्गणनायकैर्विहितमहार्हणा: सर्वर्तुकुसुमस्तबकफलकिसलयश्रिया-
ऽऽनम्यमानविटपलताविटपिभिरुपशुम्भमानरुचिरकाननाश्रमायतनवर्षगिरिद्रोणीषु तथा चामलजलाशयेषु
विकचविविधनववनरुहामोदमुदितराजहंसजलकुक्कुटकारण्डवसारसचक्रवाकादिभिर्मधुकरनिकराकृतिभिरुपकूजितेषु
विहरन्ति। 231
Of (all) these Varsas, the learned declare Bharatavarsa alone as the land where a man
can shape his destinies through actions. They speak of the other eight Varsas as the places
for enjoying the fruit of such merit as still remains to be enjoyed by those who return from
heaven (after exhausting the stock of merit which entitled them to a residence in that realm),
and designate these as the celestial spots on earth. (11) The god-like men inhabiting these
Varsas, live to an age of the thousand human years and are endowed with the strength of

ten thousand elephants. The couples there are extremely happy with their adamantine
frame, (never-failing) strength, (lasting) youth and (abundant) sense-delights, and are

possessed of extraordinary venereal capacity; while the wives conceive only once and that .

too during the closing year of their life, which (also) marks the end of their (period of) sexual
enjoyment. The conditions prevailing there are (throughout) the same as obtain in the Treta
age (here). (12) Here indeed in the precincts of hermitages and the valleys of the principal
mountains,forming the boundaries of these Varsas, with their picturesque woodlands
looking (very) graceful on account of trees with their branches and the creepers supported
by them bending low under the charming load of bunches of flowers, fruits and tender foliage
of all seasons, as well as in the lakes of limpid water, resonantwith the noise of swans, water-
fowls, Karandavas, cranes and ruddy geese—ravished by the fragrance of diverse species
of blooming young lotuses—and with the humming of various species of black bees, the
lords of gods divert themselves at will with aquatic sports and various other amusements,
the chiefs of their respective retinues adoring them with rich presents and their mind and
eyes captivated with the dalliance, (winsome) smiles and playful glances, charged with love,
of charming celestial ladies. (13)

नवस्वपि वर्षेषु भगवान्नारावणो महापुरुष: US AUN तदनुग्रहायात्मतत्त्वब्यूहेनात्मनाद्यापि
संनिधीयते । १४ । इलावृते तु भगवान् भव एक एव पुमान्न ह्यन्यस्तत्रापरो निर्विशति भवान्या: शापनिमित्तज्ञो
यत्प्रवेक्ष्यत: स्त्रीभावस्तत्पश्चाद्वक्ष्यामि। १५ |

In all these nine Varsas Lord Narayana, the Supreme Person, remains personally
present in His (diverse) manifestations even today in order to shower His grace on His
