298 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 46

RRAPERM RR eS ee NWR e eee eee were eke ere teeter vet etter enter eee

सरिच्छैलवनोद्देशान् मुकुन्दपदभूषितान्। आक्रीडानीक्षमाणानां मनो याति तदात्मताम् 1२२॥

we कृष्णं च रामं च प्राप्ताविह सुरोत्तमौ । सुराणां महदर्थाय गर्गस्य वचनं यथा ।२३॥

कंसं नागायुतप्राणं मल्लौ गजपतिं तथा । अवधिष्टां लीलयैव पशूनिव मृगाधिप: । २४॥

तालत्रयं wget धनुर्यष्टिमिवेभराट्। anes हस्तेन सप्ताहमदधाद् गिरिम् ।२५॥

प्रलम्बो धेनुकोऽरिष्टस्तृणावर्तो बकाद्य: । दैत्या: सुरासुरजितो हता येनेह लीलया 1२६॥
Delighted to meet and embrace that beloved servant of Sri Krsna, arrived at his door,
Nanda showed him (every) regard, looking upon him as Sri Krsna (Himself). (14) When he
had been (duly) treated to rice boiled in milk with sugar (which has been regarded as the best
food) and was comfortably seated in a couch and had been relieved of his fatigue by
kneading his feet and other (such) services (rendered by a servant), Nanda enquired of him
(as follows):—(15) “Is our friend, Vasudeva (the delight of Sura), O dear Uddhava, doing well,
O highly blessed one, (now that he is) free (from bondage), united with his sons and others
(wives and so on) and surrounded by his near and dear ones ? (16) Luckily (enough for us)
the wicked Karhsa—who always hated the pious Yadus, that are given to (the practice of)
 virtue—has been killed alongwith his followers (younger brothers) by his own sin. (17) Does
Krsna remember us and his mother (sitting there), (other relations) and playmates, the
cowherds (in general}, (the people of) Vraja, that looked upon him asits protector, the cows,
(the woodland of) Vrndavana and the (Govardhana) hill ? (18) Will Sri Krsna (the protector
of cows) come over (to this place but) once to see his own people ? Then (only) we shall (be
able to) behold his countenance with a shapely nose and winsome smiles and glances. (19)
We were protected from forest fire, storm and rain, the demon Arista (who came disguised
as a bull) and a python (named Sudarsana)—perils that were (so) difficult to overcome—by
Sri Krsna, who is exceedingly magnanimous. (20) (Even) as we remember the exploits of
SriKrsna, his sportful sidelong looks, laughter and talk, O dear Uddhava, all our activities get
slackened. (21) (Nay) our mind gets absorbed in him as we behold the streams, hills and
woodlands as well as the playgrounds graced by the footprints of Sri Krsna (the Bestower
of Liberation). (22) | look upon Krsna and Balarama too as the foremost of divinities come
down here (on this earth) for (accomplishing) some momentous purpose of the gods, as the
word of Garga indicated. (23) They killed in mere sport Karisa, who possessed the strength
of (not less than) ten thousand elephants, and (his) two (principal) wrestlers (Canura and
Mustika) as well as Kuvalayapida (the chief of his elephants) (just) as a lion (the king of
beasts) would kill (a number of) animals. (24) Krsna snapped the most powerful bow (of
Karnsa) measuring 3 Talas (equivalent to 27 spans*), (even) as a leader of elephants
would break a sugarcane, and held the (Govardhana) hill with one hand for a (full) week.
(25) (Nay.) by the two brothers were sportfully slain here (in this land of Vraja) the demons
Pralamba, Dhenuka, Arista, Trnavarta, Baka and others, who had conquered gods as well

as demons.” (26) a
SRR उवाच
इति संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य नन्द: कृष्णानुरक्तधी: । अत्युत्कण्ठोऽभवत्तूष्णां प्रेमप्रसरविह्वल: 1291
mie वर्ण्यमानानि पुत्रस्य चरितानि wi शृण्वन्त्यश्रूण्यवास्राक्षीत् स्नेहस्नुतपयोधरा । २८॥
mater भगवति कृष्णे नन्दयशोदयो: । वीक्ष्यानुरागं परमं नन्दमाहोद्धवो मुदा ।२९॥
Sri Suka continued : Thus vividly remembering again and again all about the two
Brothers Nanda, whose mind was full of love for Sri Krsna, kept quiet, seized as he was with

* `तालो नववितस्तय:` : so says the lexicographer Devabodha.
