732 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

क्रै बौ डौ AAA EAA HHAE HH क TEE EETRRELARS OEE SEHK REEL ह्यजा ह्य व्ये दौ क केग ee THE डज्जप्ते
eee eee EE eee eee eee eee eee eee eee eee

God (the one Reality). The injunctive and interdictory force of the sacred texts (also)
remains intact in the same way as the distinction of waking life and sleep persists (even)
in the course of a dream. (61)

भावाद्वैतं क्रियाद्वैतं seed तथाऽऽत्मन: । वर्तयन्स्वानुभूत्येह त्रीन्स्वप्नान्धुनुते मुनि: 1821
कार्यकारणवस्त्वैक्यमर्शनं पटतन्तुवत्। अवस्तुत्वाद् विकल्पस्य भावाद्वैतं तदुच्यते 1831
we ब्रह्मणि परे साक्षात् सर्वकर्मसमर्पणम्। मनोवाक्तनुभि: uel क्रियाद्वैतं तदुच्यते ex

Pondering the unity of thought, action and material substances, a contemplative soul
shakes off through Self-Realization in this( very) life his three dreams (in the shape of the
three states of waking life, dream and deep sleep). (62) To contemplate the substantial unity
of causes and effects—on the analogy of (the unity of) cloth and its warp and woof—their
diversity being unreal: this is called Bhavadwaita (unity of thought). (63) To resign with mind,
speech and body all (one's) actions to the supreme Spirit directly (without expecting any fruit
for one-self), O son of Prtha (Kunti)—this is what is called Kriyadwaita (unity of action). (64)
To identify one's own interests and enjoyment with those of one's wife, progeny and other
relations as well as of all other embodied souls—this is what is called Dravyadwaita (unity
of material substances). (65)

ae यस्य वानिषिद्धं wre येन यत्र यतो नृप। स तेनेहेत कर्माणि नरो नान्यैरनापदि । ६६1

एतैरन्यैश्च वेदोक्तैर्वर्तमान: स्वकर्मभि: । गृहेऽप्यस्य गतिं arene राजंस्तद्भक्तिभाङ्नर: ।६७।
यथा हि यूयं नृपदेव दुस्त्यजादापद्गणादुत्तरतात्मन: प्रभो: ।
यत्पादपङ्केरुहसेवया भवानहार्षोन्निर्जितदियाज: क्रतून् । ६८॥

By whatever means, at whatever place and time and from whatever source a (particular)
material is permitted to be acquired by a particular man, O protector of men, he should
perform (his allotted) duties (sacrifices etc.,) with that material and no other materials except
when in distress. (66) Making his living by his own (vocational) duties enjoined by the Vedas
and enumerated before and (similar) other duties, a man blessed with Devotion can attain
the realm or state of Sri Krsna (who is present before you), even (though staying) at home,
O king. (67) Even as you and your brothers, O king of kings, have been able to get over a
series of calamities, (so) difficult to get rid of, by the grace of Lord Sri Krsna, the supreme
Spirit, by serving whose lotus-feet you (duly) performed a number of (big) sacrifices (such
as Rajasuya and Aswamedha), having entirely subdued (all opponents including) the
elephants guarding the quarters, so shall you cross the ocean of mundane existence also
by the grace of Sri Krsna. (68)

ae Tava aise were उपबर्हण: । नाम्नातीते महाकल्पे गन्धर्वाणां सुसम्मत: ।६९1

सूपपेशलमाधुर्यसोगन्ध्य्रियदर्शान: ! स्रीणां प्रियतमो fret मत्तस्तु पुरुलम्पट: 1901

एकदा देवसत्रे तु गन्धर्वाप्सरसां गणा:। saga विश्वसृग्भिर्हरिगाथोपगायने 11921

अहं च गायंस्तद्विद्वान् स्रीभि: परिवृतो गत:।जज्ञात्वा विश्वसृजस्तन्मे हेलनं fate!
याहि त्वं शूद्रतामाशु AVM: कृतहेलन: 1192 1

तावद्दास्यामहं जज्ञे तत्रापि व्रह्मवादिनाम्।शुश्रूषयानुषङ्गेण प्राप्तोऽहं ब्रह्मपुत्रताम् ।७३।

धर्मस्ते गृहमेधीयो वर्णित: पापनाशन: | गृहस्थो येन पदवीमञ्जसा न्यासिनामियात् ox!

Formerly, in the prévious round of creation (the regime of the previous Brahma), | was
(once) born as a Gandharva (celestial musician), Upabarhana by name, highly respected
among the Gandharvas. (69) (Most) pleasing to the eye by virtue of (my) comeliness of form,
