346 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

BPRS OMS PEE EHH ERNE EN HSE OR Ee HOSE eH SOE TH SETH OH EEA EHR EMH SO He
eee SSS Ne ee REN SSN

हरौ स वव्रेऽचलितां wid यया तरत्ययत्नेन दुरत्ययं तम: । ८ ।
wa प्रीतेन मनसा al दत्त्वैडविडस्तत: i प्यतोऽन्तर्दथे सोऽपि mat प्रत्यपद्यत । ९ ।
अथायजत श॰वज्ञेशं क्रतुभिर्भूरिदक्षिणै: | द्रव्यक्रियादेवतानां कर्म कर्मफलप्रदम् igo |
सर्वात्मन्यच्युतेऽसर्वे तीव्रौघां भक्तिमुद्वहन्। ददर्शात्मनि भूतेषु तमेवावस्थितं विभुम् । ११।
तमेवं शीलसम्पन्नं ब्रह्मण्यं दीनवत्सलम्।गोप्तारं धर्मसेतूनां मेनिरे पितरं प्रजा: 1221
षदत्रिंशद्दर्षसाहस्रं शशास . क्षितिमण्डलम्।भोगै: पुण्यक्षयं कुर्वन्नभोगैरशुभक्षयम् । १३॥
एवं seed कालं महात्माविचलेन्द्रिय: । त्रिवर्गौपयिकं नीत्वा पुत्रायादान्नृपासनम् । १४॥
mm se fag मायारचितमात्मनि | अविद्यारचितस्वप्नगन्धर्वनगरोपमम् । १५॥
आत्मस्त्यपत्यसुहृदो बलमृद्धकोशमन्त:पुरं परिविहारभुवश्च रम्या: |
भूमण्डलं जलधिमेखलमाकलय्य कालोपसृष्टमिति स प्रययो faerie
Maitreya went on : When the great-minded Dhruva, an eminent devotee of the Lord,
was egged on by Kubera (the king of the Yaksas) to ask for a boon, he sought to be blessed
with constant remembrance of Sri Hari, with the help of which one is easily able to cross the
ocean of worldly existence (which is an outcome of ignorance, and) which is so difficult to
get over. (8) With a glad heart Kubera (the son of Idavida) conferred on him the boon of
constant remembrance of the Lord and thereafter vanished before his very eyes; and Dhruva
too returned to his own capital (Barhismati). (9) Then he propitiated, through (the perform-
ance of ) a number of sacrifices attended with liberal fees (to the officiating priests), the Lord
of sacrifices, who is the reward of ritual acts—performed with the help of material substances
(clarified butter etc.), sacrificial activity (the work of the priests) and the deities (such as the
fire-god, Indra and others) worshipped in the course of a sacrifice—as well as the dispenser
of their fruit. (10) Maintaining an ardent flow of Devotion to the immortal Lord, whois the Inner
Controller of all and yet who excludes all, he saw seated in himself as well as in all (other)
beings the same all-pervading Lord. (11) The people looked upon him as their own father—
him, who was thus possessed of a lofty character, devoted to the Brahmana and tender to
the afflicted, and who preserved the bounds of propriety. (12) Exhausting (the stock of) his
merit through luxuries (permitted by the Sastras) and neutralizing evil by practising self-
denial (in the form of charity and the performance of sacrifices etc.), he ruled over the
terrestrial globe for thirty-six thousand years (the span of life of a god).(13) Having thus spent
a long period as a means to (the attainment of ) the three objects of human pursuit, (viz.,
religious merit, worldly prosperity and sensuous enjoyment) with his senses fully controlled,
the high-souled Dhruva (eventually) made over the throne to his son (Utkala). (14)
Regarding this universe—which is no more real than a dream or a hallucination caused by
ignorance—as super-imposed on his own self by Maya (illusion), and realizing his own body,
wives, progeny and kinsfolk, as well as his army, rich treasury, gynaeceum, delightful
pleasure-grounds and (his dominion over) the sea-girt terrestrial globe as overtaken by
Death, he left for Visala (the forest of Badarikasrama, the modern Badrinatha). (15-16)

तस्यां विशुद्धकरण: शिववार्विगाह्य बद्ध्वाऽऽसनं जितमरुन्मनसाऽऽहताक्ष: |
We दधार भगवत्मरतिरूप we ध्यायंस्तदव्यवहितो व्यसृजत्समाधौ ie!
विक्लिद्यमानहृदय: पुलकाचिताङ्गो नात्मानमस्मरदसाविति मुक्तलिङ्ग: ।१८॥

स eee विमानाग्यं नभसोऽवतरद् ध्रुव: । विभ्राजयद्दश दिञ्ञो राकापतिमिवोदितम् 1१९।
