388 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 22

REAM HEH AHRENS क HH CKO HSE OTH HSH EE Ce HOLSTERS EE क्तैक SH HET EeeeR EHR HET जज SEH
न्न्न्न्र

own doings, into this (whirlpool of) transmigration (which is a hotbed of miseries) ? (13) It is
out of place to make enquiries about your welfare inasmuch as you revel in your own self
and no thoughts of good and evil (ever) arise in you. (14) Therefore, reposing full faith in you,
| (make bold to) enquire of you, the loving friends of the distressed, how salvation can be
easily attained in this (very) birth. (15) Surely the birthless Lord, who shines as the very self
in (all) sages and reveals Himself (in the heart of His devotees) moves about on this earth
in the guise of Siddhas (sages like you in order to shower His grace on His devotees. (16)

पृथोस्तत्सूक्तमाकर्ण्य सारं सुष्ठु मितं मधु । स्मयमान Fa प्रीत्या कुमार: प्रत्युवाच ह । १७॥
Maitreya went on : Hearing these graceful and righteous words of Prthu, which were
pregnant with serious import, brief and delightful, the sage Sanatkumara cheerfully replied

as though smiling. (17)
सनत्कुमार उवाच
ay पृष्टं महाराज सर्वभूतहितात्मना । भवता विदुषा चापि साधूनां मतिरीदूरी । १८॥
aya: GS साधूनामुभयेषां च सम्मत:। चत्सम्भाषणसम्प्रश्न: सर्वॆषां वितनोति ङम् । १९॥

aa राजन् भवतो मधुद्विष: पादारविन्दस्य गुणानुवादने |

रतिर्दुरापा विधुनोति नैष्ठिकी कामं कषायं मलमन्तरात्मन: 1201

शास्त्रेष्रियानेव सुनिश्चितो yo ama सध्ग्रग्विमृरोषु हेतु: ।

असङ्घ आत्मव्यतिरिक्त आत्मनि get रतिर्व्रह्मणि निर्गुणे च या ।२१॥

सा sen भगवद्धर्मचर्यया जिज्ञासयाऽऽध्यात्मिकयोगनिष्ठया ।

योगेश्वरोपासनया च नित्यं पुण्यश्रव:कथया पुण्यया IRI

अर्थेन्द्रियारामसगोष्ठ्यतृष्णया तत्सम्मतानामपरिग्रहेण च ।

विविक्तरुच्या परितोष आत्मन् विना हरेर्गुणपीयूषपानात् 23

अहिंसया पारमहंस्यचर्यया स्मृत्या मुकुन्दाचरिताग्र्यसीधुना ।

यमेरकामैर्नियमेश्चाप्यनिन्दया निरीहवा द्वन्द्वतितिक्षया च । २४॥

हरेर्मुहुस्तत्परकर्णपूरगुणाभिधानेन विजृम्भमाणया |

भक्त्या gay: सदसत्यनात्मनि स्यान्निर्गुणे ब्रह्मणि चाञ्जसा रति: 1241

परात्मनोर्यद् व्यवधानं पुरस्तात् स्वप्ने यथा पुरुषस्तद्विनाहो । २७॥

Sanatkumara said : A very good enquiry has been made by you, even though you know

the answer, O great monarch, your heartbeing given to the good ofall living beings, (for) such
is the bent of mind of the virtuous. (18) The meeting of pious souls is thought highly of both
by themselves and by those who meet them; for worthy questions put to and the noble
answers given by them enhance the happiness of all. (19) Certainly, O king, are you gifted
with that rare and abiding love for hearing the praises —elicited by suitable questions—of
the lotus-feet of Sri Hari (the Slayer of Madhu), which shakes off the impurity of the mind in

the shape of latent desires, so difficult to remove. (20) In the scriptures, which have made
a thorough enquiry (into the truth), (only) absence of attachment to things other than the Self

