710 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

CAH CUVEE EM EL LERCH LE TEE CLARE CLE CHEER ERE OER IT EAE CE

wd केचिदविद्वांसो मायासंसृतिमात्मन: । अनाद्यावर्तितं नॄणां कादाचित्कं प्रचक्षते ॥४१॥
a एवमेतद् भृगुर्य वर्णितं रथाङ्गपाणेरनुभावभावितम्।
संश्रावयेत् wu ag तयोर्न कर्माशयसंसृतिर्भवेत् ॥४२॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुरणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वादशस्कन्धे दशमोऽध्याय: 1201

Sita went on : Having thus granted boons to Markandeya, the three-eyed Lord
withdrew, telling His Consort of the sage’s deeds {in the form of austerities) as well as what
had been experienced by him before. (38) Having realized the glory of Mahayoga (the Yoga
of Jfana), Markandeya (the foremost of the scions of Bhrgu) forhis part goes) about the world
at will even now, exclusively devoted as he is to Sri Hari. (39) This story of the wise
Markandeya, as well as the wonderful glory of the Lord's Maya as experienced by him has
been narrated to you. (40) This (glory of the Lord's Maya, experienced by the sage
Markandeya as extending over a period of seven Kalpas according to ancient tradition) was
(as a matter of fact but) accidental (and a purely personal experience attributable to Divine
Grace and not universal). Some (however), not knowing the appearance and disappearance
of men (in the shape of evolution and dissolution) as (nothing but) the Maya of the Supreme
Spirit, declare this experience as (no other than the ordinary process of evolution and
dissolution) taking place from time without beginning and repeated (seven times at the endl
of every thousand revolutions of the four Yugas during the lifetime of Markandeya him-
self).(41) Both he who duly narrates (to others) andhe whoattentively hears, O jewel among
the Bhrgus | this story (of Markandeya), recounted as aforesaid and enriched with the glory
of Lord Visnu (who wields the wheel of Time in the shape of the discus in His hands), are rid
of transmigration, brought about by the latencies of Karma. (42)

Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

IEEE ee

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI
The significance of the Lord's own limbs, attendants and weapons
and a description of the retinue of the Sun-god (changing

every month in the course of a solar year)

शौनक उवाच

अथेममर्थं पृच्छामो भवन्तं बहुवित्तमम्। समस्ततन्त्रराद्धान्ते भवान् भागवततत्त्ववित् । १ |
तान्रिका: परिचर्यायां केवलस्य fra: wa: । अङ्गोपाङ्गायुधाकल्पं कल्पयन्ति यथा च यै: । २ ।
wat वर्णय भद्रं ते क्रियायोगं बुभुत्सताम्। येन क्रियानैपुणेन weil, यायादमर्त्यताम् । ३ ।

Saunaka submitted : Now | refer to the following point to you, the foremost among
those knowing many subjects, (since) you know the true meaning of the conclusions of all
the scriptures dealing with the worship of deities, O (great) devotee of the Lord ! (1) May
good betide you ! (Pray,) tell us—who are keen to know the course of active worship,
through proficiency in which a mortal bids fair to attain immortality (in the shape of final
beatitude)—how those well-versed in the Tantras maditate in the course of worship on the
