568 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12

OO ERE OE EEE २ ० ७ २० क OBE EMMETT EE CEE EE EE OEE ७ HED SHEE OHO MONEE ERODE HEO ETERS ROME

been learnt and that which has (yet) to be learnt, O Uddhava, seek as your refuge Me alone,
the one Self of all embodied creatures, with all your being; for with Me alone (as your
Master) you can be rid of fear from all quarters. (14-15)
उद्धव उवाच
संशय: शृण्वतो वाचं तव योगेश्वरेश्वर । न निवर्तत आत्मस्थो येन भ्राम्यति मे मन: । १६॥
Uddhava submitted : Even though | am hearing Your discourse, O Lord of (all) Masters

of Yoga, the doubtin my mind (as to whether | should really abandon all activity or not) does
not cease, so that my mind stands bewildered. (16)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
a एष wet fare: प्राणेन घोषेण गुहां प्रविष्ट: ।
मनोमयं waa ei mt ai ai ga स्थविष्ठ: । १७॥
यथानल: खेऽनिलबन्धुरूष्मा wert दारुण्यधिमथ्यमान: |
ay: प्रजातो gam समिध्यते ada मे व्यक्तिरियं हि वाणी । १८॥
एवं गदि: कर्म गतिर्विसर्गो won wt am ari: श्रुतिश्च ।
सङ्कल्पविज्ञानमथाभिमान: wi रज:सत्त्वतमोविकार: । १९॥
wa fe जीवस्त्रिवृदन्जयोनिरव्यक्त wet वयसा a आद्य: ।
विङ्लिष्टशक्तिर्बहुधेव भाति बीजानि योनिं प्रतिपद्य यद्वत् ।२०॥
य ow Ware: पुराण: कर्मात्मक: पुष्पफले प्रसूते । २१

हसायएकबहुरूपपिंन्यपयिम्पयवदसबदवेदम्।२३।
एवं गुरूपासनयैकभक्तया विद्याकुठारेण faa धीर: ।
विवृश्च्य जीवाशयमप्रमत्तत सम्पद्य चात्मानमथ त्यजास्त्रम् ।२४॥

The glorious Lord replied : The aforesaid Supreme (who gives life to all) is self-evident
in that He reveals Himself (as follows) in the (six) Cakras (Spiritual centres existing in the
human body). Having (first) entered the Adhara Cakra (located near the anus) alongwith the
sonant Prana (known by the name of Para speech) and assumed the subtle forms composed
of the mind-stuff (and known by the names of Pasyanti and Madhyama in the Manipura and
ViSuddhi Cakras located near the navel and throat respectively), He (finally) manifests
Himself (within the mouth) in the grossest form (known by the name of Vaikhari speech and)
consisting of Matra (measure of time taken in uttering a vowel sound ), accent (Udatta ete.)
and articulate sound. (17) Just as fire, existing in the form of (unmanifest) heat in the sky,
appears in a minute form (as a spark) when being repeatedly churned with force out of (a
block of) wood and (fanned by the wind and) growing larger (in course of time), blazes forth
with the help of oblations (poured into it), even so | appear (by degrees), as a matter of fact,
as (the Para, Pasyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari forms of) this (Vedic) speech. (18) Likewise
articulation, work done by the hands, locomotion, evacuation of the bowels and the bladder,
perceiving smell and taste, vision, perceiving the touch and audition, conception, cognition
