50 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 12

SRR ee eee ESE SAAR ERAS EEE CEERT ERE EERE EESESENESEEEEL ERS ARELEHERAAAARAEH HAASE

अथ द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XiIl

The genealogy of (the remaining kings of) Ikswaku's line
SR उवाच

कुशस्य चातिथिस्तस्मान्निषधस्तत्सुतो नभ:। पुण्डरीकोऽथ तत्पुत्र: क्षेमधन्वाभवत्तत: । १ ।
देवानीकस्ततोऽनीह: पारियात्रोऽथ तत्सुत: । ततो बलस्थलस्तस्माद् वज्रनाभोऽर्कसम्भव: । २ ।
खगणस्तत्सुतस्तस्माद् विधृतिश्चाभवत् सुत: । ततो हिरण्यनाभोऽभूद् योगाचार्यस्तु जैमिने: । ३ ।
fre: कौसल्य आध्यात्मं याज्ञवल्क्वोऽध्यगाद् यत:)। योगं महोदयमृषिर्हृदयग्रन्थिभेदकम्। ४ ।
पुष्यो हिरण्यनाभस्य ध्रुवसन्धिस्ततोऽभवत्। सुदर्शनोऽथाग्निवर्ण: aimee मरु: सुत: । ५ ।
योऽसावास्ते योगसिद्ध: कलापग्राममाश्रित: । कलेरन्ते west as भावयिता पुन: । ६ ।
तस्मात् प्रसुश्रुतस्तस्य सन्धिस्तस्याप्यमर्षण: । महस्वांस्तत्सुतस्तस्माद् विश्वसाह्वोऽन्वजायत । ७ 1
तत: प्रसेनजित् तस्मात् तक्षको भविता Ga: ततो बृहद्बलो यस्तु पित्रा ते समरे हत: । ८ ।

Sri Suka resumed : Now, Kuga's son was Atithi, of whom was born Nisadha and the
latter's son was Nabha. Then came Pundarika, whose son was Ksemadhanva; and from (the
loins of) the latter sprang up Devanika. Of Devanika was born Aniha and his son was
Pariyatra. From (the loins of) the latter sprang up Balasthala and of the latter was born
Vajranabha, who emanated from (a ray of ) the sun-god. (1-2) His son was Khagana and of
the latter was born a son, Vidhrti (by name). From (the loins of) Vidhrti sprang up
Hiranyanabha, a teacher of Yoga and a pupil of the sage Jaimini. From him the sage
Yajfiavalkya of Kosala received instruction in Yoga relating to the Spirit, (which is)
conducive to great elevation and capable of snapping the knot of ignorance existing in the
heart. (3-4) Hiranyanabha's son was Pusya, of whom Dhruvasandhi was born. Then came
Sudargana; from Sudargana, Agnivarna and from the latter sprang up Sighra, whose son
was Maru. He is the same (Maru) who, having attained perfection through Yoga, stays
(evento this day) as an inhabitant of Kalapagrama (a famous colony of Yogis in an obscure
part of the Himalayas), and will revive the solar dynasty, when extinct, at the end of the Kali
age. (5-6) From (the loins of) Maru sprang up PrasuSruta, whose son was Sandhi and the
son of Sandhi, again, was Amarsana. The latter's son was Mahaswan, of whom ViSwasahva
was born. (7) Of him was born Prasenajit and from (the foins of) the latter sprang up
Taksaka; and of the latter was born Brhadbala, who was slain in battle (O Pariksit!) by your
father (Abhimanyu). (8)

एते हीक्ष्वाकुभूपाला अतीता: शृण्वनागतान्। बृहद्बलस्य भविता पुत्रो नाम बृहद्रण: । ९ ।
उरुक्रियस्ततस्तस्य वत्सवृद्धो भविष्यति i प्रतिव्योमस्ततो भानुर्दिवाको वाहिनीपति: 1१०1
सहदेवस्ततो वीरो बृहदश्वोऽथ भानुमान्।प्रतीकाश्वो भानुमत: सुप्रतीकोऽथ तत्सुत: 1221
भविता मरुदेवोऽथ सुनक्षत्रोऽथ पुष्कर: weitere: सुतपास्तदमित्रजित् 1221
Feng तस्यापि बर्हिस्तस्मात् कृतञ्जय: । रणञ्जयस्तस्य सुत: Ge भविता aa: 1231
तस्माच्छाक्योऽथ FPG लाङ्गलस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: | तत: प्रसेनजित् तस्मात् क्षुद्रको भविता तत: 1१४॥
Trt भविता तस्मात् सुरथस्तनयस्तत: । सुमित्रो नाम निष्ठान्त एते बार्हद्वलान्वया: 1241
