436 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 75

SAAS KOK LEKI SH eK oe terete se ret ereee Hees KENT KNEE ENN NER eh

endeavoured to perform their respective duties to the satisfaction of Yudhisthira. (6-7)
ऋॠत्विक्सदस्यबहुवित्सु सुहृत्तमेषु स्विष्टेषु सूनृतसमर्हणदक्षिणाभि: |

wa च सात्वतपतेश्चरणं was चक्रुस्ततस्त्वबभृथस्त्रपनं द्युनद्याम् । ८ ।
मृदङ्गशङ्खपणवधुन्धुर्यानकगोमुखा: । वादित्राणि विचित्राणि नेदुरावभृथोत्सवे । ९ ।
मर्तक्यो ननॄतुर्हृष्टा गायका gee जगु: । वीणावेणुतलोन्नादस्तेषां स दिवमस्पृशत् । १०॥
चित्रध्वजपताकाग्रैरिभेन्द्रस्यन्दनार्वभि: । स्वलङ्कृतैर्भटैर्भूपा निर्ययू रुक्ममालिन: ।११॥
यदुसृञ्जयकाम्बोजकुरुकेकयकोसला: । कम्पयन्तो भुवं सैन्यैर्यजमानपुर:सरा: 1221
सदस्यत्विग्दिजश्रेष्ठा ब्रह्मघोषेणभूयसा | देवर्षिपितृगन्धर्वास्तुष्टुवु: पुष्पवर्षिण: 1१३॥
स्वलङ्कृत्ता नरा नार्यो गन्धस्रग्भूषणण्यर।विलिम्पस्योऽभिषिञ्जुस्योव्रिजह्नुर्बित्निथैरमै ।१४॥
ri: । पुम्भिर्लिप्ता: प्रलिम्पन्त्यो विजह्रुर्वारयोषित: 1941

Pariksit ! after the priests i supervisors of the sacrifice, men of learning, friends and
relations had been duly honoured with sweet words, rich presents and sacrificial fees and
Sigupala had entered the feet of the Lord, Yudhisthira went to the Ganga to perform the
concluding ablutions. (8) While the ceremony was being so performed, various instruments
of music like the Mrdanga, conch, drum, kettledrum, tabor and trumpet were played upon.(9)
The courtesans danced in great joy, the songsters sang in batches. The sound of the Vina,
flute and cymbals reached the heavens. (10) Adorned with necklaces of gold, the Yadava,
Srfijaya, Kamboja, Kuru, Kekaya and KoSala kings, with flags of various colours waving in
the air, followed Yudhisthira to the Ganga shaking the earth with their armies consisting of
fully accoutred foot-soldiers, elephants, chariots and horses. (11-12) Supervisors of the
sacrifice, priests and learned Brahmanas proceeded chanting the Vedic hymns in loud
intonations. The gods, Rsis, manes and Gandharvas showered flowers on the procession
from the heavens and sang Yudhisthira’s praises. (13) Men and women of the city adorned
with scents, garlands, beautiful clothes and ornaments (came out on the public roads and)
sported on, smearing and sprinkling one another with liquids of various kinds. (14) The
courtesans smeared the men with oil, milk, butter, scented water, turmeric powder, saffron
paste, and were themselves smeared over by men in return. It was thus that they amused
themselves. (15)

गुप्ता नृभिर्निरगमन्नुपलब्धुमेतद् tet यथा दिवि विमानवरैर्नृदेव्य: |
ता मातुलेयसखिभि: परिषिच्यमाना: सव्रीडहासविकसद्वदना विरेजु: ।१६॥
ता देवरानुत सखीन् सिषघिकषुर्दृतीभि: क्लिन्नाम्बरा विवृतगात्रकुचोरुमध्या: |
औत्सुक्यमुक्तकबराच्च्यवमानमाल्या: क्षोभं दधुर्मलधियां रुचिरैर्विहारै:। १७॥

Just as celestial ladies thronged in the sky in their beautiful aerial cars (to see this festivity
on earth), (even) so the ladies of the royal House of Indraprastha, curious to have a look at
the grand procession, came out (in beautiful palanquins and other vehicles) guarded by foot-
soldiers Bhagavan Sri Krsna, together with His companions, sprinkled water (of various
colours on them), which made their faces, bloom in bashful smiles, thus heightening their
beauty. (16) Sprinkled with water the clothes of the queens got wet, so that their limbs
including their breasts, thighs and hips could be seen through. They also took up syringes
filled with coloured water and threw jets of water on their brothers-in-law and their friends.
In the flurry of the moment their braids got loosened and flowers dropped therefrom. Pariksit,
the sight of this lovely and innocent sport on their part brought impious thoughts in the mind
of people possessed of impure hearts. (17)
