Dis. 81] BOOK TEN 457

POAC SHARC ककक 9 # KLAN ATK AKAK EN ART EMEA

पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति । ace भक्त्युपहतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मन: । ४ ।
इत्युक्तोऽपि द्विजस्तस्मै व्रीडित: पतये श्रिय: । पृथुकप्रसृतिं राजन् न प्रायच्छदवाङ्मुख: । ५ ।
सर्वभूतात्मदृक साक्षात् तस्यागमनकारणम्। विज्ञायाचिन्तयन्नायं श्रीकामो माभजत्पुरा । ६ ।
पत्न्या: पतिव्रतायास्तु सखा प्रियचिकीर्षया । प्राप्तो मामस्य दास्यामि सम्पदोऽमर्त्यदुर्लभा: । ७ ।
sa विचिन्त्य वरसनाच्चीरबद्धान्दिजन्मन: । स्वयं जहार किमिदमिति पृथुकतण्डुलान् । ८ |
नन्वेतदुपनीतं मे परमप्रीणनं सरखे। तर्पयन्त्यङ्गे मां विश्वमेते पृथुकतण्डुला: । ९ ।
इतिमुष्टिंसृवृळा'प्ताद्वितींयांजाघुमाददे।तषिंच्छीर्जगृहे Ba तत्परा OBA: ।१०॥
wanes fame सर्वसम्पत्समृद्धये । अस्मिँल्लोकेऽथवामुष्मिन् पुंसस्त्वत्तोषकारणम् 1221

The glorious Lord said ; "O friend, what present have you brought for Me from your
house? | consider as great even a small present offered by the devotee with real love; but
a lot of things offered without devotion do not bring Me pleasure. (3) Whosoever offers to Me
with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit or even water, | accept and heartily enjoy that offering of love
by that man of purified intellect.” (4) Pariksit, though encouraged by the Lord in this way, the
Brahmana, feeling shy, did not present the handful of beaten rice to the Lord of Laksmi (the
goddess of wealth) Himself. He (simply) hung his head. (5) But the Lord, who sees the mind
of all beings, knew the cause of his visit. He said to Himself, "This Brahmana is a great friend
of Mine; he never sought wealth from Me before. He approached Me now, at the entreaty of
his devoted wife, whom he is naturally anxious to please. | shall bestow on him a fortune
which is difficult of attainment even by the immortals.” (6-7) Reflecting thus, the Lord
snatched from under the covering of the Brahmana the beaten rice tied in a rag and said
"Dear comrade, whatis this? Here you have brought Me something which | like most. These
grains of beaten rice will satisfy not only Me, but the whole world.” (8-9) Saying this,
Bhagavan Sri Krsna ate one handful of that beaten rice and took another to eat, when
Rukmini, who was a manifestation of the Goddess of Wealth Herself, caught hold of the
Lord's hand, for devoted as She was to the Lord Himself, She was unable to leave Him. (10)
She said "O Lord of the universe, this is enough. One handful of rice is sufficient to please
You and to bring one an abundance of wealth of all kind in this as well as the next world.
(Taking more of it, please do not part with me as well." (11)

ब्राह्मणस्तां तु रजनीमुषित्वाच्युतमन्दिरे। भुक्त्वा पीत्वा सुखं मेने आत्मानं स्वर्गतं यथा । १२।
श्वोभूते विश्वभावेन स्वसुखेनाभिवन्दित: । जगाम स्वालयॆ तात पथ्यनुव्रज्य नन्दित: ।१३॥
स चालब्ध्वा धनं कृष्णान्न तु याचितवान् स्वयम् । स्वगृहान् व्रीडितोऽगच्छन्महद्दर्शननिर्वृत: ।१४॥
wa ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य दृष्टा ब्रह्मण्यता मया । यद् दरिद्रतमो लक्ष्मीमाङ्लिष्टो बिभ्रतोरसि । १५॥
क्वाहं दरिद्र: पापीयान् क्व कृष्ण: श्रीनिकेतन: । ब्रह्मवन्धुरिति स्माहं बाहुभ्यां परिरम्भित: ।१६॥
निवासित: प्रियाजुष्टे wis wet यथा । महिष्या वीजित: श्रान्तो वालव्यजनहस्तया ie!
wen परमया पादसंवाहनादिभि: । पूजितो देवदेवेन विप्रदेवेन देववत् ।१८॥
स्वर्गापवर्गयो: पुंसां रसायां भुवि सम्पदाम्। सर्वासामपि सिद्धीनां मूलं तच्चरणार्चनम् । १९॥
अधनोऽयं धनं oma माद्यन्नुच्चैर्न मां स्मरेत्। इति कारुणिको नूनं धनं मेऽभूरि नाददात् । २०।
The Brahmana spent the night in Bhagavan Sri Krsna's palace, partook ofa hearty repast

and felt himself as happy as if he were in the Lord’s own paradise. (12) (Panksit,) the next
morning, (taking leave of Bhagavan Sri Krsna) he left for his home. The source of life of the
