52 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

ERDAS LATTES EEA LER १२० OEE EERE EE REL EEE E TELE EEE RATA EEE EE EEA EEA HHH

Sri Suka began again : After commencing a sacrificial session King Nimi, son of
Ikswaku, invited the sage Vasistha to be the (chief) priest. He too replied, “I have
already been invited by Indra (to conduct his sacrifice), O king ! (1) | shall (therefore)
return after concluding that; (please) what for me till then". The householder (sacrificer,
King Nimi) kept silent and the sage too (left for heaven and) conducted the sacrificial
performance of Indra.(2) Knowing all this (his life and everything connected with it) to
be evanescent, the thoughtful Nimi proceeded with the sacrificial session with the help
of other priests and continued it till his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) did not return. (3)
Coming back after concluding the sacrifice and perceiving the indecorum on the part
of his disciple (King Nimi), the sage Vasistha cursed the latter (in the following words):—
"Let the body of Nimi, who regards himself (very) learned, fall I" (4) Nimi (as well)
pronounced a counter-curse on his preceptor, who had acted unrighteously (in the eyes
of Nimi), saying:—"Let your body too fall because of your not knowing what is right on
account of greed." (5) With these words, Nimi, (who was) well-versed in spiritual lore,
gave up his ghost; while the sage (my ancestor) was reborn of the gods Mitra and
Varuna through Urvagi (a celestial nymph). (6) Placing the body of Nimi in balms (with
a view to preserving it), the foremost of the sages (who were conducting the sacrificial
session on behalf of Nimi) said to the gods assembled there, after the conclusion of the
sacrificial session (as follows):—(7) “Let this (dead) body of King Nimi come back to life,
if you are pleased, 0 gods !” When the gods said ‘Amen’, (the spirit of} Nimi spoke aloud,
“Let me not be imprisoned in a body (again). (8) Stricken with the fear of separation,
sages do not !ong for union with a body and worship the lotus-feet of Sri Hari (devotion
to whom dispels the fear of transmigration). (9) | (too therefore) am not eager to get
(back) a body, which brings in its train suffering, grief and fear and because of which
death threatens the Jiva everywhere, as it follows the fish in water." (10)

देवा ऊचु:
विदेह set कामं लोचनेषु wife उन्मेषणनिमेषाभ्यां लक्षितोऽध्यात्मसंस्थित: ।११॥
अराजकभयं FT मन्यमाना महर्षय: । देहं ममन्थु: स्म निमे: कुमार: समजायत 1१२
जन्मना जनक: सोऽभूद् वैदेहस्तु विदेहज: । मिथिलो मथनाज्जातो मिथला येन निर्मिता ।१३॥

The gods replied : "Bereft of a body, may you reside at will in the eyes of embodied
souls." (In this way) Nimi took up his abode in the body (of all the Jivas), being indicated by
the opening and closing of eyes. (11) Perceiving the risk of anarchy for the people; the great
sages (who officiated as priests at the sacrificial performance of Nimi) churned the body of
the king, whence a son was born (to him). (12) By virtue of his extraordinary birth (or by
reason of his being the progenitor of a new line of Ksatriya kings) the prince was called
Janaka; bornin the line of king Nimi (who remained without a body), again, he became known
as Vaideha (son of Videha). Sprung from the process of churning and further because (the
city of) Mithila was built by him, he came to be known as Mithila. (13)

तस्मादुदावसुस्तस्य पुत्रोऽभून्नन्दिवर्धन: । तत: सुकेतुस्तस्यापि देवरातो महीपते । १४॥
तस्माद् बृहद्रथस्तस्य महावीर्य: सुधृत्पिता । सुधृतेर्धृष्टकेतुर्वै हर्यश्चोऽथ मरुस्तत: ।१५॥
मरो: प्रतीपकस्तस्माजात: कृतिरथो aa: देवमीढस्तस्य सुतो विश्रुतोऽथ महाधृति: ।१६॥
कृतिरातस्ततस्तस्मान्महारोमाथ तत्सुत: । स्वर्णरोमा सुतस्तस्य ह्रुस्वरोमा व्यजायत । १७॥
तत: सीरध्वजो जज्ञे यज्ञार्थं कर्षतो महीम्। सीता सीराग्रतो जाता तस्मात्सीरध्वज: स्मृत: ।१८।
कुशध्वजस्तस्य wed धर्मध्वजो नृप:। धर्मध्वजस्य द्मे पुत्रौ कृतध्वजमितध्वजो ।१९॥
