284 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 43

जशाकन्र LEELA A AERREREFE IAEA SESE EEE EEE R NESE ८ ६ eee HT भ्

we & fea देवक्यां जातो गोकुलम् । कालमेतं वसन् गूढो agd नन्दवेश्मनि। २४॥
पूतनानेन नीतान्तं चक्रवातश्च दानव:। अर्जुनौ गुह्यक: केशी धेनुकोऽन्ये च तद्विधा: । २५
गाव: सपाला एतेन दावाग्ने: परिमोचिता:। कालियो दमित: ad इन्द्रश्च विमद: कृत:। २६॥
सप्ताहमेकहस्तेन धृतोऽद्रिप्रवरोऽमुना | वर्षवाताशनिभ्यश्च परित्रातं च गोकुलम्। zs
मोप्योऽस्य नित्यमुदितहसितप्रेक्षणं मुखम् । पश्यन्त्यो विविधांस्तापांस्तरन्ति स्माश्रमं मुदा। २८।
वदन्त्यनेन वंशोऽयं wd: सुबहुविश्रुत: । fied चशो महत्त्वं च लप्स्यते परिरक्षित:। २९॥
अयं चास्याग्रज: श्रीमान् राम: कमललोचन:। प्रलम्बो निहतो येन वत्सको ये बकादय:। ३०॥

Leaving the dead elephant (where it was), the Lord duly entered the amphitheatre,
tusk in hand. Stained with drops of blood as well as with those of ichor and with a tusk
resting against one of His shoulders and His lotus-like face bedecked with drops of
sweat appearing on it, He looked (most) charming. (15) Surrounded by a few Gopas and
with the tusks of the elephant for Their excellent weapons, Baladeva and Sri Krsna (who
is solicited by the people) entered the amphitheatre, O king ! (16) Present in the
amphitheatre by the side of Balarama (His elder brother), the Lord appeared as a
thunderbolt to the wrestlers, a jewel among men to the male persons, love incarnate to
the ladies (other than the elderly ones), a kinsman to the cowherds (of Vraja), a
chastiser to the vile princes, a (mere) child to His parents, death (personified) to Karnsa
(the ruler of the Bhojas), as deficient in strength and immature of body to the ignorant,
the supreme Reality to the Yogis and the highest Divinity to the Vrsnis. (17) Finding (the
elephant) Kuvalayapida killed and also perceiving the two Brothers difficult to conquer,
Karhsa, though self-possessed, felt much terrified at that time, O protector of men! (18)
Decorated in a queer fashion, decked with quaint jewels and garlands and clad in weird
garments and captivating the mind of the lookers-on with Their brilliance, the two mighty-
armed Brothers shone in the amphitheatre like a pair of actors dressed in an excellent
garb. (19) Gazing on the aforesaid foremost Persons, the people of the city as well as
of the country, who were seated on the galleries, O protector of men, and whose eyes
and faces were blooming with an outburst of ecstatic joy, drank in the beauty of Their
countenance with (the cup of) their eyes, but did not feel sated. (20) They seemed to
drink off (the beauty of) the two Brothers with their eyes, to lick Them with their tongue,
to inhale Them with their nostrils and to clasp Them with their arms. (21) As though put
in mind of Their story by (the sight of) Their comeliness of form, excellences, loving
disposition and intrepidity, the onlookers spoke to one another (as follows) in the light
of whatever they had actually seen and whatever they had heard (of the two Brothers):—(22)
“Actually descended through a part of Lord Sri Hari Himself, who has His abode in
water (in the form of Narayana), these two Brothers have appeared on this earth in
the house of Vasudeva. (23) This (younger) One (Sri Krsna) was, it is understood, born
as a matter of fact of Devaki and taken to Gokula (for fear of being killed by Karnsa).
Dwelling all this time incognito he grew up (to this age) at the residence of Nanda. (24)
By Him was put to an end Putana as well as the demon (Tmavarta,) who appeared
in the form of a whirlwind, the demigod (Sankhacida), the demons Kesi (who came in
the form of a horse) and Dhenuka* (who lived in the guise of a donkey) and others
of that class, and the two Arjuna trees uprooted. (25) By this Boy were the cows along
with their keepers rescued from a forest fire, the snake Kaliya subdued and Indra (the
tuler of the gods) rid of his pride when Govardhana (the chief of the mountains) was
borne by Him on one hand for a week and {the land of) Vraja protected from rain, storm

* Although the demons Vatsa and Baka were slain by Sti Krsna and Dhenuka by Bala, the people of Mathura
were evidently misinformed that the former two had been killed by Bala and the last-named by Sri Krsna.
