Dis. 2] BOOK SEVEN 655

Me Re Re He Ke Se a Ar we जो A वजजा BY RT Be Sr RT ER को को ज्जीजोत्त च चजाजा ORR WR ERE WW वाय व न वाङ रै

recognized as responsible for our protection) ! For, He alone is the protector (everywhere),
who protects us in the (mother's ) womb (where there is nobody to look after us excepting
the Lord). (38) The wise, O ladies, call the animate and inanimate creation a (mere) plaything
in the hands of that (very) Lord who creates it by (sheer) will, who alone, all-powerful as He
is, protects it and who, though imperishable (Himself) destroys it. He (alone) is competent
to maintain and dissolve it. (39) A thing protected by destiny remains intact even though
dropped on the road; while that which is consigned to destruction by (an evil) fate perishes
even though staying at home. A forlorn creature watched over by Providence survives (even)
in the forest : while he whose doom is decreed by Providence will not survive though guarded
at home. (40)

न त्त्र wen प्रक्कृतावपि स्थितस्तस्या गुणैरन्यतमो निबध्यते ive

यथौदकॆ: पार्थिवतेजसैर्जन: कालेन जातो विकृतो विनर्यति ise!

यथानलो दारुषु भिन्न gaa यथानिलो देहगत: पृथक fer: |

यथा नभ: सर्वगतं न WS AM पुमान् सर्वगुणाश्रय: UT 1431

The bodies (of living beings) of every description come into being and perish at the

appointed time due to a variety of Karmas determining their species. The spirit, however,
whichis altogether different (from the body), is not bound by the laws relating to the body even
though dwelling in it. (41) This body is born (as something identical with the spirit) due to the
ignorance of the Jiva, though (as a matter of fact) it is different (from the Jiva) because it is
perceived (as such) and is material (too) as a house. Like an object made up of aqueous,
earthy or fiery atoms, the body, which is made up of the atoms of water, earth and fire (put
together) gets transformed in course of time and (ultimately). perishes. (42) (Just) as fire
(though) existing in pieces of wood is observed to be distinct (from them as having the
capacity to burn and illuminate things), nay, (even) as the air, though existing (everywhere)
in the body, appears as existing separately (in the different parts of the body such as the
mouth and nostrils), and (just) as ether, though pervading everywhere, does not cling to any
substance, so the spirit, (which is) the foundation of all products of matter (such as the body
and the senses) is distinct (from them). (43)

सुयज्ञो नन्वयं होते मूढा यमनुशोचथ a: श्रोता योऽनुवक्तेह स न दृश्येत कर्हिचित् ।४४॥।

न श्रोता नानुवक्तायं मुख्योऽप्यत्र wey: | यस्त्विहेन्द्रियवानात्मा स चान्य: प्राणदेहयो: ।४५॥
भूतेन्द्रियमनोलिङ्गान् देहानुच्चावचान् fay: भजत्युत्सृजति waa स्वेन तेजसा xe

यावल्लिङ्गान्वितो ह्यात्मा तावत् कर्म निबन्धनम् । ततो विपर्यय: Fa मायायोगोऽनुवर्तते ive
वितथाभिनिवेशोऽयं ae गुणेधर्थदृग्वच: । यथा मनोरथ: we: सर्वमेन्द्रियकं मृषा ।४८॥
ay नित्यमनित्यं वा नेह aretha तद्विद: | नान्यथा शक्यते कर्तुं स्वभाव: शोचतामिति ive

Indeed, O fools, here lies (the body called) Suyajfia, that you lament. He (however) who
was the hearer and the speaker in this body could never be seen even before. (44) Nor is
the great vital principle—(which inspires all the Indriyas and) which is (therefore said to be)
the foremost—the hearer or the speaker. As for the soul, which (while remaining) in a body
is endowed with the senses (perceives the various sense-objects through the different
senses), is (altogether) different from the (said) vital principle as well as from the body (both
of which are devoid of consciousness). (45) The (aforementioned) all-pervading spirit, that
is different from the body, accepts (as identical with it) bodies (of various kinds)—(both) high
