Dis. 22] BOOK THREE 233

BOWE र्जी Me च च ता SE SE AE वा ROME NT M2 Rs वा वा रा TE Fe BE BEAT Be Tes OE MRE BR TRON EV RR BET OMT BEN Te पो जो जजयो ज क चै सिजा HOR He RH आ
ज्र्त्त

latter, who recalled the instructions of the Lord, spoke to him (as follows), delighting him with
his soft accents : (49) "The tour undertaken by you, O lord, is surely intended to protect the
virtuous and kill the wicked, embodying as you do the protecting energy of Sri Hari. (50) It
is you who assume the forms of the sun-god, the moon-god, the god of fire, Indra (the lord
of paradise), the wind-god, Yama (the god of punishment), Dharma (the god of piety) and
Varuna (the god presiding over the waters), as and when necessary. Hail to you, who are
no other than Lord Visnu. (51) If you do not go about (the world), like the sun, in your
bejewelled chariot—that ever leads you to victory—twanging your fierce bow, inspiring
terrorin the heart of the wicked by (the presence of) your very chariot, taking a huge army
(behind you) and shaking the terrestrial globe by the tread of your hosts, ali the moral laws
governing the various Varnas (grades of society) and ASramas (stages in life) and made by
the Lord Himself, O king, will be broken that very moment by impious men, which will be a
deplorable state of things. (52—54) Nay, unrighteousness will flourish on account of
grasping and unruly men. If you give up all thought of the world, it will fall into the clutches
of impious men and perish. (55) Nevertheless | ask you, O valiant king, the purpose for which
you have come here; with a glad heart we shall meet your wishes." (56)

Thus ends the twenty-iirst discourse in Book Three of the great
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ODOT ERE MEL ODOD
>
+

अथ द्वाविंशोऽध्याय

Discourse XXIl
The sage Kardama accepts the hand of Devahuti

मेत्रेय उवाच
एवमाविष्कृताशोषगुणकर्मोदयो मुनिम्। सव्रीड इव तं सम्राडुपारतमुवाच ह । १ ।

Maitreya continued : The emperor felt abashed as it were to hear his exalted virtues
and exploits thus extolled and replied to the sage, who was leading a retired life (as

follows): (1)
मनुरुवाच
ब्रह्मासृजत्स्वमुखतो युष्मानात्मपरीप्सया । छन्दोमयस्तपोविद्यायोगयुक्तानलम्पटान् । २ ।
तत्राणायासृजच्चास्मान्दो:सहस्रात्सहस्रपात् । हृदयं तस्य हि ब्रह्म क्षत्रमङ्गं प्रचक्षते । ३ ।
अतो ह्यन्योन्यमात्मानं ब्रह्म at च रक्षत: | रक्षति स्माव्ययो देव: स य: सदसदात्मक: । ४ |
wa सन्दर्शनादेवच्छिन्ना मे सर्वसंशया: । यत्स्वयं भगवान् प्रीत्या धर्ममाह रिरक्षिषो: । ५ |
fast मे भगवान् दृष्टो दुर्दर्शो योऽकृतात्मनाम् । दिष्ट्या पादरज: WE sient a भवत: शिवम् । ६ ।
fern त्वयानुशिष्टोऽहं कृतश्चानुग्रहो महान्। sarge: कर्णरन्धैर्जुष्टा दिष्ट्योरातीर्गिर: । ७ ।

The Manu Said : The Cosmic Being, who is Veda personified, evolved you (the
Brahmanas), rich in austere penance, learning and Yoga (concentration of mind), and
averse to the pleasures of sense, from his mouth for the protection (continuance) of his own
self in the form of the Vedas. (2) And for the protection of the Brahmanas the same
thousand-footed Being evolved us (the Ksatriyas) from His thousand arms. Hence they
speak of the Brahmana race as His heart and the Ksatriya race as His outer limbs (arms). (3)
That is why the Brahmana and the Ksatriya protect each other as well as their own self;
while, as a matter of fact, the Lord Himself, who is both the cause and the effect and yet

mmutable, protects them (through each other). (4) All my doubts have been resolved by
your very sight inasmuch as your holiness has of your own accord lovingly pointed out the

[364] B. M. 10—
