Dis. 45 ] ॥ BOOK TEN 293

PAG IEE td terre the eee eh eSeEE Tene eee ese es eee e HE RE HEE Ae I ET IE

Devaki) and Sankarsana, O king of kings, spoke as follows: — (20) “0 father, by you two
(mother Yasgoda and yourself), full of affection, both of us have been nourished and fondled
with utmost care. Parents’ affection for their progeny is surely more profound than the love
they cherish for their own self. (21) He is the (real) father and she the mother, who nourish
like their own offspring the babes cast off by their relations incapable of nourishing and
protecting them. (22) Return you (now) to Vraja, O dear father { Having afforded delight to
ournearand dear ones we two shall follow suit in order to see you, our kinsmen, disconsolate
through affection." (23) Having thus consoled Nanda alongwith the (other) people of Vraja,
the immortal Lord honoured them with reverence with articles of wearing apparel, ornaments,
utensils and other (loving) presents. (24) Thus addressed (by Sri Krsna) and overwhelmed
with affection, Nanda hugged the two Brothers and, filling his eyes with tears, returned to
Vraja alongwith the (other) cowherds. (25)

aa Ua राजन् GE: समकारयत्। पुरोधसा ब्राह्मणैश्च यथावद् द्विजसंस्कृतिम् 126 |

तेभ्योछ्यद्दक्षिणागावोत्वमयाला:स्वलङ्कृता: ।स्वल्ङ्कांभ्य: संपूज्य सवत्सा: क्षौममालिनी: । २७।

a: कृष्णरामजन्मर्षे मनोदत्ता महामति: । ताश्चाददादनुस्मृत्य कंसेनाधर्मतो हता: RCI

wag लब्धसंस्कारौ द्विजत्वं wa सुव्रतौ । गर्गाद् यदुकुलाचार्याद् गायत्रं व्रतमास्थितौ 1२९1

प्रभवौ सर्वविद्यानां सर्वज्ञौ जगदीश्वरौ । नान्यसिद्धामलज्ञानं yet नरेहितै: 1201

aa गुरुकुले वासमिच्छन्तावुपजग्मतु: | aed arte नाम ह्यवन्तीपुरवासिनम् । ३१॥

यथोपसाद्य at दान्तौ qa वृत्तिमनिन्दिताम् । ग्राहयन्तावुपेतौ स्म भक्त्या देवमिवादूतो 1221

तयोर्दविजवरस्तुष्ट: शुद्धभावानुवृत्तिभि: । प्रोवाच वेदानखिलान् साङ्गोपनिषदो गुरु: । ३३1

wee धनुर्वॆदॆ धर्मान् न्यायपथांस्तथा | तथाचान्वीक्षिकीं विद्यां राजनीतिं च षड्विधाम् । ३४।

we नरवरश्रेष्ठौ सर्वविद्याप्रवर्तकौ । सकृन्निगदमात्रेण तो संजगृहतुर्नृप । ३५॥

अहोरात्रैश्चतु:षष्ट्या संयत्तौ तावती: कला: । गुरुदक्षिणयाऽऽचार्यं छ्न्दयामासतुर्नृप 1351

सम्मन्त्य पत्न्या स महार्णवे मृतं बालं प्रभासे वरयाम्बभूव ह ।३७॥
वेलामुपव्रज्य निषीदतु: amt सिन्धुर्विदित्वार्हणमाहरत्तयो: 1301

ame भगवानाशु गुरुपुत्र: प्रदीयताम्।योऽसाविह त्वया ग्रस्तो बालको महतोर्मिणा । ३९।
Vasudeva (the son of Sara), O king, then duly caused to be performedin accordance with
the scriptural ordinance by his priest (the sage Garga) and other Brahmanas the purificatory
rite (of investiture with the sacred thread) conferring the rank of a Dwija (the twice-born) with
respect to both his sons. (26) Having appropriately worshipped them he gave to them, when
they were duly adorned, fees for their services as well as cows fully decked with gold
necklaces and other ornaments as also with silk wreaths and accompanied by calves. (27)
Recalling his resolve made at the time of birth of Sri Krsna and Balarama, Vasudeva (who
was possessed of a lofty mind) gave away even those cows that had been mentally gifted
by him (on that occasion) and which had been unlawfully seized by Karhsa. (28) Having gone
through the purificatory rite (of investiture with the sacred thread) and (thereby) attained the

rank of a Dwija (the twice-born) the two Brothers of noble vows thereupon embarked on the
vow of celibacy* under the instructions of Garga, the preceptor (of Yadu's race).(29)
en र्त

* The vow of celibacy actually consists of three vows successively entered into by a refiglous student belonging to the
awice-bor classes. The first of them, known by the name of Gayatra. is of three days' duration and is undertaken as a
