Dis. 31] BOOK FOUR 435

.. ७.३.३.३.६.६.३-.२.३.३.३.७.३.३.३.३.३.३.७.३३.३.३.। गेर्णघ्रंऐप्प्फ्प्नेध्राण्यंप्घ्रप्नेच्चथ्रफ्रिणिंर्शच्चप्रंमॆगेन्धिंर्व्यम्नंघंफ्रिगेब्देर्पार्पाप्रैफ्रिर्षाघप्नंप्नध्रंगेषींघंम्नंर्गार्थेगैग्रे॰गैर्मोघं
ज्र्त्त

Thus ends the thirtieth discourse in Book Four of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PICISESES I

अथैकत्रिंशोऽध्याय:

7 Discourse XXXI
The story of the Pracetas
तत उत्पन्नविज्ञाना आश्वधोक्षजभाषितम् । स्मरन्त आत्मजे भार्यां विसृज्य प्राव्रजन् गृहात् । १ ।
दीक्षिता ब्रह्मसत्रेण सर्वभूतात्ममेधसा | प्रतीच्यां falar वेलायां सिद्धोऽभूद्यत्रजाजलि: । २ ।
तान्निर्जितप्राणमनोवचोदृशो जितासनान् शान्तसमानविग्रहान्।
परेऽमले ब्रह्मणि योजितात्मन: सुरासुरेड्यो cael स्म नारद: । ३ ।
तमागतं a उत्थाय प्रणिपत्याभिनन्द्य च । पूजयित्वा यथादेशं सुखासीनमथान्रुवन् x |

Maitreya continued : After that (i.e., after enjoying earthly and celestial pleasures for
a million years—vide verse 17 of the last discourse) when wisdom dawned on the Pracetas,
they remembered the words of Lord Visnu (vide verse 18 of the same discourse) and,
leaving their wife (Marisa) to the care of their son (Daksa), immediately quitted their home
(by way of renunciation). (1) On the seashore in the west, where (the celebrated sage) Jajali
had attained perfection (in the form of God-Realization) they took a vow of enquiry into the
Supreme Spirit, which culminates in the realization of the same as the one animating
principle permeating all life. (2) The sage Narada; who deserves the praise of gods and
demons (alike), saw (called on) the Pracetas, who had fully controlled their breath, mind,
speech and sight, who could remain squatting in a particular posture as long as they would,
keeping their body absolutely motionless and straight, and had concentrated their mind on
the transcendent Brahma untainted by Maya. (3) Seeing him come, they rose (from their
seat), fell prostrate at his feet, welcomed him and worshipped him with due ceremony. And
when he was comfortably seated they spoke to him (as follows). (4)

प्रचेतस ऊचु:
स्वागतं a सुरर्षेऽद्य दिष्ट्या नो at गत:। तव चङ्क्रमणं ब्रह्मन्नभयाय यथा रवे: । ५ ।
चदादिष्टं भगवता शिवेनाधोक्षजेन च । तद गृहेषु प्रसक्तानां प्रायश:क्षपितं प्रभो । ६ ।
wa: प्रद्योतयाध्यात्मज्ञानं तत्वार्थदर्शानम्। येनाञ्जसा तरिष्यामो दुस्तरं भवसागरम्। ७ |
The Pracetas said : Welcomeis your visit (to this place) today, O celestial sage | Thank
God that you have appeared before us. Your going about (from place to place), like the
revolution of the sun, O holy one, brings fearlessness (to the world). (5) What was taught (to
us) by Lord Siva and Bhagavan Visnu (who is beyond sense-perception) has almost been
forgotten (by us), strongly attached as we were to our home, O master. (6) Therefore, kindle
(once more) in us the light of spiritual wisdom, revealing the truth of things, whereby we may
easily cross the ocean of mundane existence. which is so difficult to cross. (7)
मैत्रेय उवाच
‘eft प्रचेतसां get भगवान्नारदो मुनि: । भगवत्युत्तमर्लोक आविष्टात्माव्रवीन्नृपान् । ८ |

Maitreya went on: Requested thus by the Pracetas, the divine sage Narada, whose
