356 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 57

eae OR SITTER RIOR toro ininnoiintcintnioiioine niin tonto iinininiioh ion आश्व ai

तैलद्रोण्यां मृतं प्रास्य जगाम गजसाह्वयम्।कृष्णाय विदितार्थाय तप्ताऽऽचख्यौ पितुर्वधम् । ८ ।

त्तदाक्ण्यैश्चयौ राजन्ननुसृत्य नृलोकताम्। अहो न: परमं कष्टमित्यस्राक्षौ विलेपतु: । ९ ।

आगत्य भगवांस्तस्मात् सभार्य: साग्रज: पुरम्। शतधन्वानमारेभे हन्तुं हर्तुं मणि तत: ।१०॥
Overwhelmed with grief to behold her father slain, Satyabnama too piteously wailed saying
“Ah father, dear father, lam undone!" andfainting {atintervals). (7) Consigning the deceased
to a trough full of oil (to guard against decomposition), the afflicted lady drove (all the way) to
Hastinapura (the city bearing a name denoting the elephant) and reported to SriKrsna, who
was (already) aware of the fact {omniscient as He was), the death of her father. (8) Hearing
the (sad) news and following the practice of the human world, O Pariksit, the two almighty
Brothers wailed with tears in Their eyes, exclaiming: "Alas, a great calamity has befallen us." (9)
Returning (forthwith) from Hastinapura to Dwaraka alongwith His consort and elder
Brother, the Lord made preparations to kill Satadhanva and recover the gem from him. (10)

सोऽपि कृष्णोद्यमं ज्ञात्वा भीत: प्राणपरीप्सया । साहाय्ये कृतवर्माणमयाचत स चाब्रवीत् । ११॥
नाहमीश्वरयो: pal हेलनं रामकृष्णयो:। को नु क्षेमाय कल्पेत तयोर्वृजिनमाचरन् । १२।
कंस: सहानुगोऽपीतो agora: श्रिया । जरासन्ध: wae संयुगान् विरथो wa: 1231
waren: स चाक्रूरं पार्णित्राहमयाचत । सोऽप्याह को विरुध्येत विद्वानीश्वरयोर्बलम् ex!
च इदं लीलया fad सृजत्यवति हन्ति च । चेष्टां विश्वसृजो ae न विदुर्मोहिताजया । १५॥
a: सप्तहायन: eqs पाणिना aa लीलया are उच्छिलीन्ध्रमिवार्भक: 1281
Tee भगवते कृष्णायाद्भुतकर्मणे। अनन्तायादिभूताय कूटस्थायात्मने नम: 1१७॥
प्रत्याख्यात: स तेनापि TTT महामणिम् । तस्मिन् न्यस्याश्वमारुह्य शतयोजनगं ययो ।१८॥
Alarmed to know of Sri Krsna's plans {to kill him) and in his anxiety to save his life,
Satadhanva too solicited Krtavarma for help and the latter replied (as follows): (11) "I dare
not cross the two almighty Brothers. Having given offence to Them, who can as a matter of
fact hope to live in peace ? (12) Karnsa was shorn of {all} his glory through enmity with Them
and met his end alongwith his followers. (Nay,) Jarasandha {the powerful ruler of Magadha
and father-in-law of Karhsa) escaped {with life) at the end of {each of his) seventeen
encounters {with Them), deprived (even) of his chariot." (13) Having been refused help {in
these words by Krtavarma), he next sought Akrira for help. Akrira too replied, "Knowing the
strength of the two divine Brothers, who will dare antagonize Them ? (14) Hail to the
celebrated Lord Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds, who creates, preserves and dissolves the
universe by way of sport; nay, deluded by whose Maya (His beginningless Energy}, (even)
the progenitors of the world cannot comprehend His activity; who, having uprooted a (whole)
mountain (Govardhana) (even) as a seven-year-old boy, held it up in one hand with as much
ease as an infant would pluck up and hold a mushroom; Hail to that immortal and immutable
Self, the most ancient Being!" (15—17} Refusedhelp even by Akrira, Satadhanva deposited
the valuable gem with him and, riding a horse capable of traversing (in a single journey) one
hundred Yojanas {eight hundred miles), left (Dwaraka). (18)
गरुडध्वजमारुह्य रथं रामजनार्दनो । अन्वयातां महावेगैरश्चरै राजन् RETIN
मिथिलायामुपवने विसृज्य पतितं हयम्। पद्भ्यामघावत्सन्त्रस्त: कृष्णोऽप्यन्वद्रवद्रुषा 1201
पदातेर्भगवांस्तस्य `पदातिस्तिग्मनेमिना | चक्रेण शिर उत्कृत्य वाससो व्यचिनोन्मणिम् । २१1
अलब्धमणिरागत्य FN आहाग्रजान्तिकम्। वृथा et: जतधनुर्मणिस्तत्र न विद्यते । २२।
aa आह बलो नूनं स मणि: शतधन्वना । कस्मिंश्चित् ged न्यस्तस्तमन्वेष yt व्रज । २३॥
अहं विदेहमिच्छामि ose प्रियतमं wai इत्युत्वा मिथिलां राजन् fade यदुनन्दन: ।२४॥

