we

716 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. i2

MR LER BMH REMMI HREM BMA LE EAI ABABA SEAT EA AVRAHAM

अथ द्वाद्शोऽध्याय:

K Discourse XIl
A Synopsis of (all) the twelve Skandhas (of Srimad Bhagavata)

सूत उवाच
नमो धर्माय महते नम: कृष्णाय वेधसे। ब्राह्मणेभ्यो नमस्कृत्य धर्मान् वक्ष्ये सनातनान् । १ ।
We व: कथितं विप्रा विष्णोश्चरितमद्भुतम्। भवद्धिर्यदहं get नराणां पुरुषोचितम् । २ ।
अत्र सङ्कीर्तित: mara सर्वपापहरो हरि: । नारायणो हृषीकेशो भगवान् सात्वतां fa: । ३ ।
अत्र wa परं गुह्यं wa: प्रभवाप्ययम्।ज्ञानं च तदुपाख्यानं प्रोक्तं विज्ञानसंयुतम् x ।
भक्तियोग: समाख्यातो वैराग्यं च तदाश्रयम्। पारीक्षितमुपाख्यानं नारादाख्यानमेव च । ५ ।
प्रायोपवेश्ञो राजर्षेर्विप्रशापात् परीक्षित: । शुकस्य ब्रह्मर्षभस्य संवादश्च परीक्षित: । ६ 1

Sita began again : Hail to the exalted virtue in the shape of devotion to Sri Hari ! Hail
to Sri Krsna, the Maker of the universe ! Bowing (again) to the Brahmanas (as well), | shall
expound the eternal verities (discussed in Srimad Bhagavata). (1) (So) have I narrated to
you, O Brahmana sages ! this wonderful (sublime) story (in the form of Srimad Bhagavata)
of Lord Visnu, about which you asked me and which is worth hearing for menin whom there
is (any) trace of humanity (left). (2) Here stands duly celebrated Lord Narayana Himself,
the Ruler of (our) senses, the Protector of devotees, (also) known as Sri Hari, the Dispeller
ofall sins. (3) In this has been discussed the mysterious transcendent Brahma, the source
and end of (all) creation, (the topic of) spiritual enlightenment cum Realization and the
means of awakening them. (4) (In addition to this) there has been discussed at length the
discipline of Devotion (both as a means and an end itself) as well as Vairagya (freedom
from passion) hinging on the latter. (Now hear the contents of the twelve Skandhas in a
more or less serial order.) The narrative of (the birth etc., of) Pariksit and (as a prelude to
it) the story of (the previous incarnation of) the (celestial) sage Narada. (5) The vow of the
royal sage Pariksit as a sequel to the curse of a Brahmana (boy) to fast till death and (the
opening of) the dialogue between Pariksit and Suka, the foremost of Brahmanas. (6) (Here
ends the theme of Book One.)

योगधारणयोत्क्रान्ति संवादो नारदाजयो: । अवतारानुगीतं च wt प्राधानिकोऽग्रत: । ७ 1

The (process of) ascent (to the higher regions of a departing soul) through Yogic
concentration; the dialogue between Narada and (his father) Brahma (the birthless creator);
an account of the Lord's descents in the order of sequence and (a description of) the cosmic
evolution from Prakrti (Primordial Matter) from the (very) beginning. (7) (Here ends the theme
of Book Two.)

विदुरोद्ध्वसंवाद: क्षत्तृमैत्रेययोस्तत: | पुराणसंहिताप्रश्नो महापुरुषसंस्थिति: । ८ ।
तत: प्राकृतिक: wt: सप्त वैकृतिकाश्च ये । ततो ब्रह्माण्डसम्भूतिर्वैराज: पुरुषो यत: । ९ ।
कालस्य स्थूलसूक्ष्मस्य गति: पद्मसमुद्भव:। भुव उद्धरणेऽम्भोधेर्हिरण्याक्षवधो यथा ।१०॥
ऊर्ध्वतिर्यगवाक्सर्गो oo caida च। अर्धनारीनरस्याथ यत: स्वायम्भुवो मनु: ।११॥
