68 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

२१ २२२ २२ २२ २२२२ Legs eet चचच व व thik iret व व

Sri Suka resumed ; Like the six senses (including the mind) of an embodied soul,
the following six were the sons of Nahusa—Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Ayaii, Viyati and Krti.
(1) Yati (the eldest) did not desire the sovereignty, offered by his father, since he knew
the end of sovereignty, having entered which one is no longer able to realize the Self.
(2) On his father (Nahusa) having been hurled from heaven and transformed into a
python by the (curse of) the Brahmanas (the sage Agastya and others) due to the
former's impudence towards Indra’s wife, therefore, (it was) Yayati (who) became the
king. (3) Yayati (the elder brother) appointed (his four) younger brothers (Samyati and
others) as governors in the four quarters (each in one quarter) and, having taken to
wife the daughters of Sukracarya and Vrsaparva, ruled over the globe (as its suzerain

lord). (4)
राजोवाच
ब्रह्मर्षिर्भगवान् काव्य: क्षत्रबन्धुश्च नाहुष: । राजन्यविप्रयो: कस्माद् विवाह: प्रतिलोमक: । ५ !
The king (Pariksit) submitted : The glorious Sukracdrya was a Brahmana sage and
Yayati (the son of Nahusa), a mere Ksatriya. How did the irregular marriage of a Ksatriya king

with a Brahmana girl take place ? (5)
AYR उवाच
एकदा दानवेन्द्रस्य शर्मिष्ठा नाम कन्यका । सखीसहस्ररसंयुक्ता ws च भामिनी । ६ ।
देवयान्या पुरोद्याने पुष्पितद्रुमसङ्कुले । व्यचरत् कलगीतालिनलिनीपुलिनेऽबला । ७ ।
ता जलाशयमासाद्य कन्या: कमललोचना: । aR न्यस्य दुकूलानि विजह्रु: सिञ्चतीर्मिथ: । ८ ।
वीक्ष्य ard fiftr सह gen वृषस्थितम्। सहसोत्तीर्य वासांसि पर्यधुव्रींडिता: स्रिय: । ९ ।
शर्मिष्ठाजानती वासो गुरुपुत्र्या:; समव्ययत्। स्वीयं मत्वा प्रकुपिता देववानीदमब्रवीत् 120 |
अहो निरीक्ष्यतामस्या दास्या: कर्म ह्यसाम्प्रतम् । अस्मद्धार्यं धृतवती Wa हविरध्वरे ices
ae तपसा ye मुखं da: we 41 धार्यते afte ज्योति: fra: पन्थाश्च दर्शित: 1221
यान् वन्दन्सुपप्तिष्ठन्ते लोकनाथा: सुरेश्वरा: । भगवानपि विश्वात्मा पावन: श्रीनिकेतन: 1231
aa तत्रापि भृगव: शिष्योऽस्या न: पितासुर: । अस्मद्धार्यं धृतवती set वेदमिवासती । १४॥
एवं wrt ats शुरुपुत्रीमभाषत।रुषा श्वसन्त्युङ्गीव धर्षिता दष्टदच्छदा ।१५॥
आत्मवृत्तमविज्ञाय meet ag भिक्षुकि । किं न प्रतीक्षसेऽस्माकं गृहान् बलिभुजो यथा ।१६।
एवंविधै: सुपरुषै: क्षिप्त्वाऽचार्यसुतां adh शार्मिष्ठा प्राक्षिपत् कूपे are आदाय मन्युना । १७1
Sri Suka replied : Accompanied bya thousand girl companions as well as by Devayani,
the daughter of Sukracarya (the preceptor of the Danavas), Sarmistha; the virgin daughter
of Vrsaparva (the celebrated Danava chief}—who, though belonging to the weaker sex, was
(yet) very proud—was strolling, on one occasion, in the city garden, full of flowering trees and
adorned with the sandy strands of a lotus pond swarming with sweetly humming bees.(6-7)
Arriving at the pond and leaving their clothes on the margin, those maidens with eyes
beautiful as a pair of lotuses sported in it, sprinkling one another with water. (8) Observing
Lord Sankara, mounted on a bull alongwith His divine Consort (Goddess Parvati) passing
(that way), the damsels felt abashed and put on their clothes, coming out of the pond at
once.(9) Sarmistha unwittingly put on the raiment of the preceptor's daughter, regarding it
as her own. Getting enraged (at this), Devayani spoke thus:—(10) "Oh | just look at the

indecorum of this servant-maid in that like a bitch snatching away the oblation in a sacrifice
she has put on the clothing which was meant to be put on by us. (11) Even among the
