Dis. 5] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 31
BERR RAB BERBER Re GEORGE Bi BBR RE BRE RE RRB BRE MOR MRR Be RM ROM Hr PR RMT BO We Re Re RO RE RR Re RH RRO BB MORO OT HR BRT
lured by greed of wealth, their paramour had gone to some distant place and would return
within that (very) year. (13) A wise man as a matter of fact should under no circumstance
repose trust in wicked women. The fool who relies on them is assailed by calamities. (14)
None is beloved of women, whose speech is full of nectar and enhances the delight of the
concupiscent, while their heart is piercing as the edge of a razor. (15) Collecting (all) the
wealth those unchaste women having many a paramour absconded; while Dhundhukari
took the from of a dreadful spirit as a result of his evil deeds. (16) Assuming the form of a
whirlwind and tormented by cold and sunshine, he ever ran hither and thither going without
any nourishment and remaining thirsty. (17) Repeating the words "Ah, goodness |" he found
no protection anywhere. After some time Gokarna learnt from the people that he had died. (18)
(Realizing how helpless the spirit was, Gokarna performed the Sraddha ceremony with
respect to him at Gaya. Nay, to whatever place of pilgrimage he repaired he did Sraddha
there. (19)

एवं भ्रमन् स गोकर्ण: स्वपुरं समुपेयिवान्। रात्रौ गृहाङ्गणे स्वप्तुमागतोऽलक्षित: परै: 1201

तत्र सुप्तं स विज्ञाय धुन्धुकारी स्वबान्धवम्। निशीथे दर्शयामास महारौद्रतरं ag: 1281

सकृन्मेष: apes सकृच्च महिषोऽभवत्। सकृदिन्द्र: सकृच्चाग्नि: पुनश्च पुरुषोऽभवत् 1221

वैपरीत्यमिदं दृध्टा गोकर्णो धैर्यसंयुत: । अयं दुर्गतिक: कोऽपि निश्चित्याथ तमब्रवीत् 1231

Roaming about in this way the said Gokarna returned to his own town. Unnoticed by

others he came to sleep at night in the courtyard of his own house. (20)Coming to know that
his kinsman was lying asleep there, Dhundhukari revealed himself to him at midnight in a
most frightful form. (21) Now he appeared as a ram, now as an elephant and again as a
buffalo. Now he appeared in the form of Indra, now as the god of fire and again in a human
form. (22) Perceiving this inconsistent behaviour (of his) Gokarna concluded that he was
somebody in an evil plight and, remaining firm spoke to him (as follows): (23)

गोकर्ण उवाच
कस्त्वमुग्रतरो रात्रौ कुतो यातो ददामिमाम् fee वा प्रेत: पिशाचो वा राक्षसोऽसीति ste न: । २४॥

Gokarna said : Who are you appearing in an exceedingly frightful form at night and
whence have you been reduced to this plight ? (Please) tell us whether you are some spirit
or fiend or ogre. (24)

Ud उवाच
एवं पृष्टस्तदा तेन रुरोदोच्चै: GH: पुन: । अहाक्तो वचनोच्चारे SA चकार ह ।२५॥
ततोऽञ्जलौ जलं कृत्वा गोकर्णस्तमुदैरयत्।तत्सेकहतपापोऽसौ प्रवक्तुमुपचक्रमे । २६॥

Stta continued : Questioned by him thus at that moment, the spirit cried at the top of
his voice again and again. Being unable to speak, he made gestures alone, it is said. (25)
Taking water in the hollow of his joined palms then (and consecrating it with a sacred text)
Gokarna threw it on him. (And) purged of his sin (to some extent) by being sprinkled with that
water, the spirit began to speak (as follows): (26)

प्रेत उवाच
अहं भ्राता त्वदीयोऽस्मि धुन्धुकारीति ama: । स्वकीयेनैव दोषेण wed ard मया ।२७॥
अत: प्रेतत्वमापन्नो eat च वहाम्यहम्।वाताहारेण ser दैवाधीनफलोदयात् ।२९॥
aa बन्धो कृपासिन्धो भ्रातर्मामाशु मोचय । गोकर्णो वचनं श्रुत्वा तस्मै वाक्यमथाब्रवीत् । ३० |
