x ॥
प्रथम: स्कन्घ:

अथ प्रथमोऽध्याय:

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana
Book One

Discourse |
Saunaka and other sages interrogate the famous Siuta* (UgraSrava)

जन्माद्यस्य यतोऽन्वयादितरतश्चार्थेष्भिज्ञ: स्वराट् तेमे ब्रह्म eel य आदिकवये मुह्यन्ति यत्सूरय: |

तेजोवारिमृदां यथा विनिमयो यत्र त्रिसर्गोऽमृषा धाम्ना स्वेन सदा निरस्तकुहकं सत्यं परं धीमहि । १।

श्रीमद्भागवते महामुनिकृते किं वा परैरीश्वर: सद्यो हृद्यवरुध्यतेऽत्र कृतिभि: दुश्रूषुभिस्तत्क्षणात् । २।
पिबत भागवतं रसमालयं मुहुरहो रसिका भुवि भावुका: । ३।

We meditate on that transcendent Reality (God) from whom this universe springs up, in
whom it abides and into whom it returns—because He is invariably present in all existing
things and is distinct from all non-entities—who is self-conscious and self-effulgent, who
revealed to Brahma (the very first seer) by His mere will the Vedas that cause bewilderment
even to the greatest sages, in whom this threefold creation (consisting of Sattva,Rajas and
Tamas), though unreal, appears as real (because of the reality of its substratum)—even as
the sun's rays (which are made up of the element of fire) are mistaken for water (ina mirage),
water for earth and earth for water—and who ever excludes Maya by His own self-effulgent
glory. (1) In this glorious Bhagavata, produced by the great sage Vedavyasa, has been
taught that supreme Religion (the Religion of God-worship, the Bhagavata Dharma’as it is
called) which is entirely free from all self-deception in the shape of desire (including the
desire for Moksa or Liberation). Nay, herein has been expounded that absolute Reality which
canbe known only by saints whoare free from malice, nay, which is the bestower of supreme
bliss and uproots the threefold agony (1.the agony caused by bodily distemper, 2. that which
is attributable to natural agencies and 3. that inflicted by a fellow-being). While itis doubtful
that God can be speedily captured in one's heart by other means, He can be instantly seized
through this work by those blessed persons who have a keen desire to hear it recited. (2)
O ye devotees possessing a taste for divine joy, Srimad Bhagavata is the fruit (essence) of
the wish-yielding tree of Veda, dropped on earth from the mouth of the parrot-liketsage Suka,
and is full of the nectar of supreme bliss. It is unmixed sweetness (devoid of rind, seed or

* The Sitas are a mixed caste born of a Ksatriya father and a Brahmana mother.
+Itis a well-known truth that a fruit bit by a parrot is exceptionally sweet. There is a pun on the word 'Suka’ in this verse,
which also means a parrot.
