252 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

RHEE EARN PONE EREEHEHOHERAEEE EERE HEREC EEOETEA RATES OEE HH eH CHEHHEARE HH E TAPIA

अथ षड्विंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVI
The process of evolution of the Mahat-tattva and
other fundamental principles

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अथ ते सम्प्रवक्ष्यामि तत्त्वानां wat पृथक् । यद्विदित्वा विमुच्येत पुरुष: प्राकृतैर्गुणे: । १ ।
ज्ञानं नि:श्रेयसार्थाय पुरुषस्यात्मदर्शनम्। saga तत्ते हृदयग्रन्थिभेदनम् । २ ।
अनादिरात्मा पुरुषो निर्गुण: wea: पर: । प्रत्यग्धामा स्वयंज्योतिर्विश्वं येन समन्वितम् । ३ |
स एष प्रकृतिं सूक्ष्मां दैवीं गुणमयीं fay: | यदृच्छयेवोपगतामभ्यपद्यत लीलया । ४ ।
गुणैर्विचित्रा: gait सरूपा: spit wor: । विलोक्य मुमुहे सद्य: स इह ज्ञानगूहया । ५ |
एवं पराभिध्यानेन add spt: पुमान्।कर्मसु क्रियमाणेषु गुणैरात्मनि मन्यते । ६ |
qe संसृतिर्बन्ध: une च तत्कृतम्। भवत्यंकर्तुरीशस्य साक्षिणो निर्वृतात्मन: | ७ |

The Lord continued: Now | shall tell you, one by one, the distinctive features of the
different categories, by knowing which a man is freed once for all from (the yoke of ) the
modes of Prakrti. (1) | shall (also) explain to you the nature of Knowledge in the form of Self-
Realization, which, by cutting the knot of egotism existing in the heart, leads the Jiva to final
beatitude: so declare the wise. (2) The Purusais no other than the Spirit, whois beginningless,
devoid of attributes, existing beyond Prakrti (Matter), revealedin the heart (of all beings) and
self-effulgent, nay, pervaded by whom the universe presents itself to our view.(3) This all-
pervading Purusa accepted of his own free will the unmanifest divine Prakrti, consisting of
the three Gunas, that sought him in her playful mood.(4) (Already) abiding in Prakrti, the
Purusa fell a prey to her charms, that obscure knowledge, and forgot himself the moment
he saw her evolving through her Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) progeny of various kinds
with forms conforming to either of the three Gunas. (5) By identifying himself with Prakrti, who
is other than himself, the Purusa attributes the doership of actions which are being performed
by the Gunas of Prakrti to himself. (6) Itis this feeling of doership which binds him to actions,
although (really speaking) he is a mere witness and therefore a non-doer. And it is this
bondage through action which makes him helpless (in the matter of pleasurable and painful
experiences), although he is independent (in reality), and subjects him to repeated births and
deaths even though he is blissful by nature. (7) The knowers of Truth recognize Prakrti as
responsible for the identification of the soul with body, with the senses and mind as well as
with the agents (the deities presiding over the senses etc.). As for the experience of pleasure
and pain they hold the Purusa (identifying himself with Prakrti) to be responsible, although
(as a matter of fact) he is beyond Prakrti. (8)

देवहूतिरुवाच
प्रकृते;३ पुरुषस्यापि लक्षणं पुरुषोत्तम। ब्रूहि कारणयोरस्य सदसच्च यदात्मकम् । ९ ।

Devahiti said: Kindly also tell me, O Supreme Person, the characteristics of Prakrti and
Purusa, the two causes of this universe, which in its gross and subtle forms is nothing but
a manifestation of these.(9)

a

श्रीभगवानुवाच
यत्तस्निगुणमव्यक्तं fie सदसदात्मकम् ! प्रधानं प्रकृतिं प्राहुरविशेषं fara igo!
