Dis. 29 ] BOOK FOUR 421

Serer Ws Wee ३३3 SOOO CO ey eee tte SOS जज य ITO Wet का कचद्रा See Re SOKO HEN BERRI SOIOICIIOIO RY SOW RIOR WhO tH OR

Admonished thus by the fellow-swan, the swan of the Manasa lake was (once more)
established in his own self and regained his self-consciousness, which had been lost due «
to his having parted company with his friend. (64) O Pracinabarhi, | have imparted this
Spiritual truth to you in an indirect manner, for the glorious Lord, the Maker of the universe,
loves to remain incognito. (65)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse forming part of the parable of Purafijana,
“in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa -Samhita.

Set Pcet १५२७ Bs
CIDE NEN

IS
अ व्याय:
Discourse XXIX
The Dialogue between king Pracinabarhi and the sage Narada (continued)

प्राचीनबर्हिरुवाच
भगवंस्ते वचोऽस्माभिर्न सम्यगवगम्यते। कवयस्तद्विजानन्ति न वं कर्ममोहिता: । १ ।
Pracinabarhi said : 0 divine Sage, we are unable to follow your teaching correctly. It
is the wise alone who can rightly grasp it; not we, who are deluded by attachment to the
rituals . (1)

ARG उवाच

Ged Wer fame व्यनक्त्यात्मन: पुरम्। एकद्वित्रिचतुष्पादं बहुपादमपादकम् । २ |

योऽविज्ञाताहतस्तस्य पुरुषस्य सखेश्वर: । यन्न विज्ञायते पुग्भिर्नामभिर्वा क्रियागुणे: । ३ |

यदा जिघृक्षन् पुरुष: cesta प्रकृतेर्गुणान्। नवद्वारं द्विहस्ताङ्ध्रिं तत्रामनुत साध्विति । ४ ।

बुद्धिं तु प्रमदां विद्यान्प्माहमिति यत्कृतम्। यामधिष्ठाय य देहेऽस्मिन्पुमान् भुङ्क्तेऽक्षभिर्गुणान् । |

सखायइद्गियग्ष्णाज्ञानंकर्मचयस्कृत्तम्।सरव्यस्तक्कृत्तय: प्राण: पञ्चवृत्तिर्यथोरग: । ६ |

बृहद्बलें मनो विद्याद्रुफ्रि।पञ्चम्याला:पञ्चविण्यायन्मध्येनबखंपुरम्।छा
Narada replied : One should understand Purafjana (lit., the maker of a city) to be the
Jiva (an embodied soul), inasmuch as itis the Jiva that produces a stronghold for itself in the
shape of a body with one, two, three, four or numerous feet or without any feet. (2) The friend
of the Jiva referred to under the name of Avijfiata is (no other than) God, so-called because
He is not fully known by the Jivas as having names, actions or attributes. (3) When the Jiva
wished to enjoy all material objects, it thought the human body endowed with two hands
and two feet and nine appertures as the best among all. (4) One should understand the
young woman (Purafjani) to be (no other than) the (human) intellect, which gives rise to the
notions of '!' and ‘mine’. Identifying himself with it the Jiva in this body enjoys the (various)
Sense-objects thrqugh the senses. (5) The (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and
the five organs of action), which bring about (all) knowledge and action, are the male
companions (of Purafijani); their activities are her female companions and the vital air with
its fivefold activity is referred to as a (five-hooded) serpent. (6) One should understand
Brhadbala (the eleventh mighty warrior waiting on Puranijani) to be (no other than) the mind,

the ruler of both the types of Indriyas. The kingdom of Paficala represents the five sense-
objects, in the midst of which stands the city with nine gates. (7)

ata fae eof qa fragerattia & at alesis ameterdaa 1c
