248 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25
MOR RE Mt WORE BiB HIE RS Se BBR TAT NY ORE) Oe oe rE eT re ete re eo ee eR Be
तमासीनमकर्माणं तत्त्वमार्गाग्रदर्शनम् | स्वसुतं देवहूत्याह धातु: संस्मरती aa । ६ |

Maitreya said : When Kardama (Lord Kapila's father) had left for the forest, Lord Kapila
stayed (in the latter's hermitage) on the strand of the same Bindusarovara in order to please
His mother (Devahtti). (5) (One day) when Kapila (Devahtti's son), who was capable of
showing to herthe culmination of the fundamental principles, sat atleisure, Devahiti recalled
the words of Brahma (vide verse 18 of the preceding discourse) and spoke to Him (as

follows). (6) क
निर्विण्णा नितरां भूमन्नसदिन्दियतर्षणात्। येन सम्भाव्यमानेन SORRY तम: प्रभो । ७ ।
तस्य त्वं तमसोऽन्धस्य दुष्पारस्याद्य WM सच्चक्षुर्जन्मनामन्ते लब्धे मे त्वदनुग्रहात्। ८ |
य आद्यो भगवान् पुंसामीश्वरो वै var किल | लोकस्य तमसान्धस्य wa: सूर्य इवोदित: । ९ ।
aa मे देव सम्मोहमपाक्रष्टुं त्वमर्हसि । योऽवग्रहोऽहंममेतीत्येतस्मिन् योजितस्त्वया 1१०॥
a त्वा Tae BW we ayaa: कुठारम्।
fare «weet: पूरुषस्य नमामि सद्धर्मविदां वरिष्ठम्।११॥

Devahiti said : । am awfully sick of the craving (for enjoyment) of my wicked senses, 0
Perfect One! It is because of my unremitting efforts to gratify this craving that | have fallen
into the deep abyss of ignorance, O Lord. (7) In this present birth, which (1 am sure) is going
to be the last of a long series, । have now, by Your grace, secured in You an excellent eye
to enable me to see through this thick veil of darkness, which is so difficult to penetrate. (8)
You are no other than the Lord, the most ancient Person and the Ruler of all embodied souls,
who has appeared, like the sun, as an eye to the world blinded by ignorance. (9) Now be
pleased, my lord, to dispel my great delusion; for the feeling of !-ness with reference to the
body and that of mine-ness in respect of all that is connected with it have been inspired by
You. (10) For ascertaining the true nature of Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (Spirit) | have
sought refuge in You, who afford protection to all and are a veritable axe to the tree of

metempsychosis in the case of Your devotees. | bow to You, the foremost of those knowing
the secret of true religion. (11) ।
मेत्रेय उवाच

धियाभिनन्द्यात्मवतां wat गतिर्बभाष ईषत्सितशोभितानन: ।१२॥
Maitreya continued : On hearing of His mother's innocent desire, which was calculated

to stimulate in men the longing for liberation, the Lord, who is the goal of noble souls that have
subdued their self, mentally approved of it and spoke as follows, His countenance beaming

with a gentle smile. (12)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
am आध्यात्मिक: Gai मतो नि:श्रेयसाय मे । अत्यन्तोपरतिर्यत्र दु:खस्य च सुखस्य च । १३
तमिमं ते प्रवक्ष्यामि यमवोचं पुरानघे। ॠषीणां श्रोतुकामानां योगं सर्वाङ्गनैपुणम् । १४॥
चेत: खल्वस्य बन्धाय मुक्तये चात्मनो मतम्। गुणेषु सक्तं बन्धाय Ta वा पुंसि मुक्तये । १५॥
अहंममाभिमानोत्थै:र कामलोभादिभिर्मलै: । did यदा मन: शुद्धमदु:खमसुखं समम् । १६॥
Weal पुरुष आत्मानं केवलं प्रकृते: परम्।निरन्तुं स्वयंज्योतिरणिमानमखण्डितम् । १७॥
ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तेन भक्तियुक्तेन चात्मना । परिपश्यत्युदासीनं प्रकृतिं च हतौजसम् ।१८॥

