Dis. 6] BOOK ELEVEN 541

AROSE SD PU RORHENEFORED COTTE RSE ECE NUNC ORE OES ENAANEOLeREATEEEREKEnERnenanEnen rene

revolving in the form of a twelve-month) consisting of three navels (each of four months),
engaged in the destruction of all and possessed of imperceptible speed. (15) Having derived
its power from You and (thus) acquiring unfailing energy, the Purusa (Spirit) in conjunction
with Maya deposited the Mahat-tattva, corresponding as it were to the seed of this (visible)
universe. Equipped with that (very) power the Mahat produced out of itself the golden
(effulgent) egg of the universe enveloped by its (seven) external sheaths {in the shape of the
earth, water, fire, air, ether, ego and mind). (16) Therefore, 0 Propeller of the Indriyas, You
are the suzerain Ruler of the immobile as well as the mobile creation, because even though
enjoying (in the form of the Jiva) the objects of the senses evolved through the modification
of the Gunas brought about by Maya You remain unattached to them: while others (the Jivas)
remain afraid of sense-enjoyments even when they have been renounced by them-
selves.(17) (All) Your sixteen thousand (and odd) wives could not even shake Your mind by
their shafts of Cupid and other charms skilled in Conveying the message of love despatched
by their arched eyebrows fascinating with the sentiment expressed by their suppressed
smile and sidelong glances. (18) The streams {of Your glory) bearing the water of Your
nectar-like stories and rivers (like the holy Ganga) that have washed Your feet are capable
of destroying (all) the sins of the three worlds. Those who take pains for the purification of
their self resort to both these types of holy waters—the former, in the formot Your glory sung
in the Vedas, by means of their ears and the latter, emanating from Your feet, through the

contact of their body. (19)
बादरायणिरुवाच
इत्यभिष्ट्य विबुधै:; da: ङातधृतिर्हरेम्। अभ्यभाषत aia. प्रणम्याम्बरमाश्रित: 1201

SriSukaresumed: Having thus extolled and bowed low to SriHari, alongwith the (other)
gods, Brahma, accompanied by Lord Siva and Standing in the air (all the while), submitted
to Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows):—(20)

ब्रह्मेवाच
भूमेर्भारावताराय qa विज्ञापित: प्रभो । त्वमस्माभिरहोषात्मंस्तत्तथैवोपपादितम् ।२१॥
धर्मश्च स्थापित: aay सत्यसन्धेषु वै त्वया । कीर्तिश्च fea विक्षिप्ता सर्वलोकमलापहा 1221
wat यदोर्वंश्रे बिभ्रदू स्पपमनुत्तमम् । कर्माण्युद्दामवृत्तानि हिताय जगतोऽकृथा: 1231
यानि ते afar मनुष्या: ara: कलौ । शृण्वन्त: कीर्तयन्तश्च तरिष्यन्त्यञ्जसा तम: । २४॥
यदुवंदोऽवतीर्णस्य भवत: पुरुषोत्तम । शरच्छतं व्यतीयाय पञ्चविंश्चाधिकं प्रभो । २५॥

नाधुना तेऽखिलाधार देवकार्यावहेषितम्। gs च विप्रश्ञापेन नष्टप्रायमभूदिदम् 1२६॥

तत: स्वधाम wo fama यदि मन्यसॆ | सलोकांल्लोकपालान् a: पाहि वैकुण्ठकिङ्करान् । २७।
Brahm said: Formerly You were entreated by us to remove the burden of the earth, O
Lord ! That has been accomplished (by You) precisely as was desired by us, O Inner
Controller of all! (21) Righteousness has been firmly established by You among the virtuous
pledged to truth and glory, which is capable of destroying the sins of all men, diffused on all
sides. (22) Descendingin the line of Yadu and manifesting a form unsurpassed (in elegance),
You performed deeds of extraordinary valour for the good of the world. (23) Hearing of and
celebrating, O Lord, those exploits of Yours that have been mentioned heretofore, pious men
inthe Kali age shall easilyget through (the darkness of) ignorance. (24) Acenturyandtwenty-
five years more have elapsed, O Lord, since You appeared in the race of Yadu, O Supreme
Person ! (25) 0 Support of the universe, no part of the gods’ Purpose now remains to be
accomplished; and this race of Yours (too) has become well-nigh extinct through the curse
of the Brahmanas. (26) Therefore, return, if You please, O Visnu, to Your transcendent realm
