Dis. 27 ] BOOK FOUR ॥ 415

ह श्व MERE नाजा ROR ORE Be BE त्र ह EO EE eet st etree iron tee 8: SOREN We te Re Me Re Re MERE RT Re RT eT RH eH eB छ डो

दौर्भाग्येनात्मनो लोके विश्रुता दुर्भगेति सा । या qe राजर्षये तु वृतादात्पूरवे वरम् । २०॥
कदाचिदटमाना सा ब्रह्मलोकान्महीं गतम्। वव्रे Fest at तु जानती काममोहिता ies
मयि संरभ्य विपुलमदाच्छापं सुदु:सहम्। स्थातुमर्हसि नैकत्र मद्याच्ञाविमुखो मुने । २२॥
ततो विहतसङ्कल्पा कन्यका यवनेश्वरम्। मयोपदिष्टमासाद्य aa नाम्ना भयं पतिम् । २३॥
RAY यवनानां wt gu वरीरेप्सितं पतिम्। सङ्कल्पस्त्वयि भूतानां कृत: किल न रिष्यति । २४॥
द्वाविमावनुशोचन्ति बालावसदवग्रहौ | यल्लोकशास्त्रोपनतं न राति न तदिच्छति । २५॥
aa भजस्व मां भद्र भजन्तीं मे दयां कुरु। एतावान् पौरुषो धर्मो यदार्ताननुकम्पते 1261

There is a daughter of Kala (the Time-Spirit), who ranged over the three worlds, desirous
of (securing) a husband. Nobody (however) would welcome her, O Pracinabarhi! (1 9) Due
to her forbidding nature she became known in the world by the name of Durbhaga (an
accursed woman). Accepted (once) by the royal sage Puru (the youngest son of Yayati) she
conferred on him the boon of sovereignty, highly pleased (with him). (20) On a certain day,
when | had (just) descended to the terrestrial globe from the realm of Brahma (the creator),
she in the course of her peregrination (came and) wooed me, infatuated as she was with
passion, even though she knew that I was vowed to perpetual celibacy. (21) Enraged at my
refusal, she pronounced a formidable curse, saying : "Having turned a deaf ear to my
advances, you shall never stay at one place (long), O sage !" (22) Her will (thus) crossed,
the maid thereafter approached the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya (Fear) by name, as
instructed by me, and accepted him for her husband (with the following words) : "I court you,
the foremost of the Yavanas, as my coveted husband, O gallant youth ! The hope centred
by creatures (men) in you never goes in vain. (23-24) Both he who does not part with and
he who refuses to accept that which offers itself as worth giving or taking—according to
usage and (the injunctions of) the scriptures—are ignorant and perverse; the wise feel sorry
for them. (25) Therefore, O blessed one, be gracious to me and accept me, who offer my
hand to you. To compassionate the afflicted—that is the sacred duty of a man.” (26)

कालकन्योदितवचो निशम्य चयवनेश्वर: । चिकीर्षुर्देवगुह्यं a सस्मितं तामभाषत । २७॥
मया निरूपितस्तुभ्यं पतिरात्मसमाधिना । नाभिनन्दति लोकोऽयं त्वामभद्रामसम्मताम् । २८॥

त्वमव्यक्तगतिर्भुङ्कष्व लोकं कर्मविनिर्मितम्। याहि मे पृतनायुक्ता saat प्रणेष्यसि ie
प्रज्वारोऽयं मम भ्राता त्वं च मे भगिनी भव । चराम्युभाभ्यां लोकेऽस्मिन्नव्यक्तो भीमसैनिक: । ३० ।
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराण पारमहंस्यां संहितायां चतुर्थस्कन्ये पुरञ्जनापाख्याने सप्तविंशाऽध्याय: 1291
Hearing the words addressed by the daughter of Kala, the lord of the Yavanas, who was
eager to accomplish the secret mission of the gods (viz., to bring about the death of living
beings), smilingly replied to her (as follows): (27) “With the help of my intuitive vision | have
found out a husband for you. The world does not welcome you because you are inauspicious
and despised. (28) (Now,) moving about imperceptibly, enjoy you the (whole) creation owing
its existence to Karma (thus treating everyone of it as your husband). Sally forth with my
army and you will bring about the destruction of (all) created beings. (29) Here is my brother,
Prajwara (mortal fever), and be you sister to me. With you both and followed by a formidable
army | shall range over this world unperceived. (30)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse forming part of the parable of Purafijana,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samnita.

cet Poet Pat
PISS Sires
