Dis. 13] “BOOK SEVEN — ४5

Br Rete We ae BOWS Be BT TT PEE EEE H HECKER HCE SH CEH HEHEHE KL RARE ERA AKEK ALAA HH HH ESCH HH

Brahma, interpenetrating the whole universe,consisting of (both) cause and effect. (4) With
his eyes turned towards the Self, he should discover the true nature of the Self at the point
of contact between deep sleep and waking life and look upon (both bondage and release as
a mere illusion and not real. (5) He should neither welcome death which is inevitable, nor life
which is uncertain. He should only await (the course of) Time, which is responsible for the
birth and death of created beings. (6) He should never indulge in profane literature (books
not treating of spiritual subjects), nor should he make his living by any profession (such as
medicine, astronomy and so on). He should avoid (all) controversial reasoning and should
never espouse any (particular) cause (in a partisan spirit). (7) He should not attach (a number
of) disciples to himself nor should he study many a book (that may divert his mind from the
object of his pursuit, viz., spiritual enlightenment). He should neither take to discoursing nor
should he engage in undertakings (such as the construction of a monastery and so on) on
any account. (8) In the case of a high-souled recluse, tranquil (by nature) and equable of
mind, (observance of the rules of conduct prescribed for) the (particular) Asrama (stage in
life) is not generally intended to secure (any) religious merit. (When spiritual enlightenment
is attained,) he may continue to observe such conduct (and retain the emblems of his
Agrama) or may give it up. (9) Though no (outward) sign (of his greatness or of his being a
Sarnnyasi) may be visible (to others), his object (in life) should be (quite) evident. Though
intelligent, he should show himself (behave) as though he were a madman or a fool and,
though wise (eloquent), he should show himself as dumb in the eyes of the people. (10)

पुरातनम् । प्रह्रादस्य च Mae मुनेराजगरस्य च ।११॥
तँ शयानं धरोपस्थे कावेर्यां सह्यसानुनि । रजस्वलैस्तनूदेशैर्निगूढामलतेजसम् ।१२॥
ददर्शं लोकान्विचरंल्लोकतत्त्वविवित्सया | वृतोऽमात्यै: कतिपयै: प्रह्रादो भगवत्मिय: 1831
कर्मणाऽऽकृतिभिर्वाचा लिङ्गैर्वर्णाश्रमादिभि: । न विदन्ति जना यं वै सोऽसाविति न वेति च । १४।
तं नत्वाभ्यर्च्य विधिवत् पादयो: शिरसा स्पृशन् । विवित्सुरिदमप्राक्षीन्महाभागवतोऽसुर: ।१५॥
Wirt we esd wer भवति नान्यथा ।१६॥
न 3 gana निरुद्यमस्य am नु हार्थो aw भोग: ।
अभोगिनोऽयं aa विप्र देह: पीवा यतस्तद्वद न: क्षमं चेत् ।१७॥
कवि: कल्पो निपुणदक चित्रप्रिकथ: सम: । लोकस्य कुर्वत: कर्म Vea तद्बीक्षितापि वा । ec
On this very point (the conduct of a recluse as recommended in the above verses) the
wise narrate (by way of an illustration) the following old legend (mainly) consisting of a
dialogue between Prahrada (the demon king) and the ascetic (Lord Dattatreya*) who was

(then) following the mode of life ofa pythont. (11) Going about the (various) worlds with intent
to ascertain the truth concerning the people and accompanied by a few ministers (alone),

* We have been toldin |. ili. 11 that the Lord appeared in the form of Dattatreya (son of Atri through Anasiya) and taught
the science of the Spirit to king Alarka, Prahrada and others. From this it may be safely concluded that the ascetic referred
to here was no other than Dattatreya.

t A python is represented to be an unwieldy creature capable of little or no locmotion and catching its prey with its
jaws and devouring only whenit falls within its easy reach. Anyone following its mode of lifeis, therefore, expected to remain
lying down on the bare ground in an open space all the time, stirring on no account and making no effort even to pick up
food if offered. He is supposed to answer the calls of nature in that very posture and would accept food only when itis thrown
into his mouth. He is practically dead to the world and drags his existence only to work out the Prarabdha or destiny
responsible for his birth. Only a JAaniof the highest order, who has lost all consciousness of the body and to whom life and
death are alike, can think of following this mode of life. ।
