Dis. 15 ] BOOK SEVEN 731

ew a ज पा न Ae चच श्नंगंर्गार्षाष्टांष्टं…"द्द्वगं!',श्वप्भ्रेष्ठी/र्गाष्ठी’र्गार्व्यआंगं!?छांभुंग्र्षाप्रैर्णस्यैप्नेघेग्रेग्रेद्बीपैक्खिर्व्यर्व्यघे”श्चेप्रीटींघीषींग्नौ*र्व्यघेथेर्षीर्षाप्रैभ्रेगैध्रेर्भश्रींघीग्नीगैर्घा
त्व्याजा SBE मा र्यं

Nem men xs

य i पितृदेवानामयने वेदनिर्मिते। शासत्रेण चक्षुषा dq जनस्थोऽपि न मुह्यति ।५६॥
Seed जनानां सद् बहिरन्त: परावरम् A ज्ञेयं वचो वाच्यं तमो ज्योतिस्त्वयं स्वयम् । ५७
आबाधिताऽपि ह्याभासो यथा वस्तुतया Ba: | दुर्घटत्वादेन्द्रियकं तद्वदर्थविकल्पितम् । ५८।
क्षित्यादीनामिहार्थानां orn न कतमापि हि । न संघातो विकारोऽपि न पृथङ्नान्वितो मृषा । ५९॥
धातवोऽवयवित्वाच्च तन्मात्रावयवैर्विना | न स्युर्ह्यसत्यववविन्यसन्नवयवोऽन्तत: । ६०॥
स्यात् सादृश्यभ्रमस्तावद् विकल्पे सति वस्तुन: । जाग्रत्स्वापो यथा स्वप्ने तथा विधिनिषेधता । ६१॥

(Even) he who discerns these two paths presided over by the manes and the gods
(respectively)—conclusively and distinctly made known by the Vedas—with the eye of
scriptural knowledge never gives way to infatuation even though remaining in (this)
body.(56) (For) as a matter of fact, he (the knower of these two paths) himself comprises
what exists before (as the cause of) and after (as the background of), outside (viz., the
objective universe) and inside (viz., the subject or the ego) all bodies; and he is the high
and the low. (Again,) he is the understanding (the cognitive faculty) as well as that which
is worth knowing, the word and the thing denoted by it, darkness as well as light. (In other
words, there is nothing other than him, which may infatuate him). (57) Even as a
reflection is taken to be real, even though (logically) disproved in everyway, so all
objective existence (impinging on our senses as material) is (only) fancied to be real
(though not real), being difficult to be reconciled with reason. (58) The psycho-physical
organism, which is (popularly believed to be) a combination of the (five gross) elements,
earth and so on, is indeed none of the following possibilities : it is neither their collection
nor compound nor even modification; (for) it is neither distinct from them nor pervaded
by them. Hence itis illusory. * (59) The (five gross) elements (the constituent of the body)
too cannot exist apart from their finer components (in the shape of the subtle elements)
because of their being compounds themselves (whose existence as apart from their
components has already been disproved). (And) indeed, in the event of a compound as
such being (proved to be) non-existent, a component too ultimately proves to be non-
entity;(for there is no proof for the existence of a component other than the fact that the
appearance of a compound cannot be otherwise accounted for). (60) (It may be asked
here : how do you account for the identity of an individual at different periods if you deny
the existence of an individual ? (Our reply to this is that) the delusion about the identity
of an individual (whose existence as apart from his limbs along with that of the limbs has
just been shown to be a mere illusion) persists (only) so long as we attribute diversity to

Oc १११

* The body of an embodied soul is believed to be a combination of the five elements. Now, that which is supposed to
be a combination of two or more units falls under one of the following categories: (1) It may be a mere collection of those units
as, for stance, what is known as a thicket is nothing but a collection of shrubs, trees etc., growing close together, (2) Or it
may be a compound, i. €., a combination of elements just as water is declared to be acombination of hydrogen and oxygen(3)
Or again it may be a modification of two or more substances as. for instance, curds is a modification of milk combined with
an acid. An organism alls under none of these three categories. Itis neither a mere collection of the five elements of which
itis believed to be constituted, as a thicket is of shrubs, trees and so on. For, the shrubs etc., of which a thicket is constituted
donot cohere in the same way as the elements doin the case of an organism. Norcanan organism be said to be a compound
or modification of the elements. For, a compound or modification of substances must be either distinct from or pervaded by
those Subsiances: and an organism cannot in the first place be conceived as altogether different from the elements. If, on
the other hand, it is believed to be pervaded by the elements, the question arises: does the whole pervade every part of it in
its entirety or only partially ? If it pervades every partin its entirety, even a finger will pass for the entire body. And ifitis urged
that il pervades every part only partially, there wilt be no end to the process of partition. Hence the existence of a whole as
apart Irom its parts is only illusory and not real. And since every partis a whole in retation toits own parts the separate existence
of the parts too is similarly disproved and thus the vehole range of objective existence is proved to preved to be a colossal hoax.
