Dis. 24 ] BOOK TEN 211

Om eg ni eo २ PEE EERE SS ETE EEE २२२२ २२२२२२२ २२२२ २२२२

as may be deemed proper. And after supplying grass to the cows let the (aforesaid articles
of) food be offered to the mountain. (28) Duly adorned after taking your meals, artistically
painted with sandal-paste etc., and decently dressed, go you round the cows, the Brahmanas,
the sacred fires and the mountain, keeping them to your right (as a mark of respect). (29) Let
this view of mine be adopted, O father, if it pleases you. This worship will be dear to the cows,
the Brahmanas and the mountain as well as to myself. (30)

कालात्मना भगवता जक्रदर्पं जिघांसता । प्रोक्तं निशम्य नन्दाद्या: साध्वगृह्णन्त Age: 1321
तथा च व्यदधु: wa यथाऽह मधुसूदन: | वाचयित्वा स्वस्त्ययनं तद् द्रव्येण गिरिद्विजान् । ३२1
saga बलीन् सर्वानादृता यवसं गवाम्। गोधनानि पुरस्कृत्य गिरिं चक्रु: प्रदक्षिणम् 1321
अनांस्यनडुद्युक्तानि ते चारुह्य स्वलङ्कृता: | गोप्यश्च कृष्णवीर्याणि गायन्त्य: सद्विजाशिष: ।३४॥
कृष्णस्त्वन्यतमे रूपं गोपविश्रम्भणे wa: | weasel ब्रुवन् भूरि बलिमादद् बृहद्वपु: 1341
wal नमो sen: सह चक्रेऽऽत्मनाऽऽत्मने 1 अहो पञ्यत Sets रूपी नोऽनुग्रहं व्यधात् । ३६1
एषोऽवजानतो Faia, कामरूपी adie: | हन्ति ह्यस्मै नमस्याम: शर्मणे आत्मनो गवाम् । ३७1
इत्यद्रिगोद्विजमखं वासुदेवप्रणोदिता: | यथा विधाय ते गोपा: सहकृष्णा व्रजं ययु: ।३८॥

इति श्रीमद्भागवगते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां ददामस्कन्धे पूर्वार्धे चतुर्विंशोऽध्याय: ।२४॥

Sri Suka went on : Hearing the words uttered by the Lord, who in the form of the Time-
Spirit sought to crush the pride of Indra, Nanda and others received His advice with
approbation and did everything (precisely) as Sri Krsna (the Destroyer of the demon Madhu)
had said. After getting benedictory verses recited (by the Brahmanas) and respectfully
offering all the varieties of food out of the oblations meant for Indra to the mountain and the
Brahmanas and grass to the cows they as well as the cowherd women, who were well-
adorned and were celebrating the exploits of Sri Krsna, rode in their bullock-carts and placing
their cattle-weaith ahead of them went round the mountain keeping it to their right, the
Brahmanas pronouncing their benedictions. (i—34) Having assumed another peculiar
form, that created confidence in the mind of the cowherds (to whom the mountain was
represented as a god), Sri Krsna in that gigantic personality consumed the abundant mass
of offerings saying, "lam the mountain (Govardhana) !” (35) Alongwith the people of Vraja,
Sti Krsna Himself offered His greetings to that (other) Self of His, saying, "Oh ! look here,
appearing ina visible form this mountain has shown his grace to us. (36) Taking any form
at will this deity actually kills such mortals as dwelling in the forest show disrespect to him.
(Hence) for our own welfare as wellas for that of the bovine race we bow to him.” (37) Having
thus performed with due ceremony the worship of mount Govardhana, the cows and the
Brahmanas as particularly directed by Sri Krsna (the Son of Vasudeva), the said cowherds
returned to Vraja alongwith Sri Krsna. (38)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samnhita.

Sins ENS Es
PDO SEL LSD
