तेभ्यो aM कन्ये द्वे वयुनां धारिणीं स्वधा। उभे ते ब्रह्मवादिन्यौ ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगे । ६४॥
भवस्य wat तु सती wa देवमनुव्रता। आत्मन: BR पुत्रं न लेभे गुणशीलत: ।६५॥
`पितर्यप्रतिरूपे स्वे भवायानागसे रुषा । अप्रौढेवात्मनाऽऽत्मानमजहाद्योगसंयुता ।६६॥

Swadha bore them a couple of daughters, Dharini and Vayuna, both of whom not only
mastered the scriptures but also attained spiritual wisdom, and further taught such spiritual
wisdom. (64) Sati (Daksa's youngest daughter and) the Consort of Bhava (Lord Siva), was
devoted to Lord Bhava, but did not get a son resembling her in good qualities and character.
For, while yet very young, she dropped her body of her own accord by dint of Yoga
(concentration of mind), ina spirit of indignation against her father (Daksa) on account of his
antagonism against Lord Bhava, who had done him no wrong. (65-66)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between Vidura and Maitreya,
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ts ` ६
od Sieve

अथ ह्रितीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Il
Ill feeling between Lord Siva and Daksa

विदुर sara
wa ञ्लीलवतां AB दक्षो दुहितृवत्सल: । विद्वेषमकरोत्कस्मादनादृत्यात्मजां सतीम् । १ ।
ae ares निर्वैरं शान्तविग्रहम् । आत्मारामं कथं Be जगतो Gad महत्। २ ।
एतदाख्याहि मे ब्रह्मन् जामातु: श्वशुरस्य च । विद्वेषस्तु यत: प्राणांस्तत्यजे दुस्त्यजान्सती | ३ ।
Vidura said: How did Daksa, who was (so) fond of his daughters, happen to bear ill-will
towards Lord Bhava, the foremost among those possessed of an amiable disposition,
disregarding his own daughter, Sati (1) Who would bear enmity and how could anyone bear
enmity to Him, the Teacher of the whole animate and inanimate creation, who bears enmity
to none, is possessed of a tranquil personality, delights in His own Self and is the highest
object of veneration to the (whole) universe ? (2) Be pleased to tell me, holy sage, what led
to such bitterness of feeling between the son-in-law (Lord Siva) and the father-in-law
(Daksa), as compelled Sati to give up her very life, which is So difficult to part with? (3)

मैत्रेय उवाच
qa विश्वसृजां सत्रे समेता: परमर्षय: । तथामरगणा: ad सानुगा मुनयोऽग्नय: । ४ |
wa प्रविष्टमृषयो दृध्टार्कमिव रोचिषा । भ्राजमानं वितिमिरं कुर्वन्तं तन्महत्सद: | ५ |
उदतिष्ठन् सदस्यास्ते स्वधिष्ण्येभ्य: सहाम्नय: saa विरिञ्चं ad च तद्भासाऽऽक्षिप्तचेतस: । ६ |
सदसस्पतिभिर्दक्षो भगवान् साधु सत्कृत: । अजं लोकगुरुं नत्वा निषसाद तदाज्ञया । ७ |

Maitreya replied: (Once) of old allforemost seers and sages as wellas hosts of divinities
including the gods presiding over the sacred fires assembled with their attendants in a
