Dis. 3] +«:BOOK TWO 95

RATS जा वी च यजजा CRM HH SHEE CHR SEK SHHE AES HHES He COE eH OE Ew ee TO ee शं
eee SSS ee

intellect and other phenomenal objects are adjuncts that lead us to infer the existence of the
Lord, who is the all-witnessing seer. (35) Therefore, O king, men should always and under
all circumstances with their whole being listen to, recite and revolve in their mind (the stories
of) Lord Sri Hari alone. (36) They who drink in the nectar-like stories of the Lord, the Soul of
the universe, poured into the cups of their ears by holy men, are able to purify their heart,
which has been contaminated through contact with the pleasures of sense, and attain
‘proximity to His lotus-feet. (37)

=

Thus ends the second discourse entitled "A Description of the Lord's Divine Form",
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

Sah 8 pik Ca OS
DOD EER BELLS

अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse Ill
Worship of different deities for the gratification of various desires
and the superiority of Devotion to the Lord
श्रीरुक उवाच

एवमेतन्निगदितं पृष्टवान् यद्भवान् AA aU यन्म्रियमाणानां मनुष्येषु मनीषिणाम् । १ |

ब्रह्मवर्चसकामस्तु यजेत ब्रह्मणस्पतिम्। safer प्रजाकाम: प्रजापतीन् । २ ।

adi मायां तु श्रीकामस्तेजस्कामो विभावसुम्। वसुकामो वसून् ter वीर्यकामोऽथ वीर्यवान् । ३ ।

अन्नाद्यकामस्त्वदितिं स्वर्गकामोऽदिते: Gar विश्वान्देवान् राज्यकाम: साध्यान्संसाधको faa । ४ |

सपाभिकामो गन्धर्वान् स्रीकामोऽप्सरउर्वशीम्। आधिपत्यकाम: सर्वेषां ata amiga ६ ।

यज्ञं Uae यशस्काम: कोशकाम: प्रचेतसम् । विद्याकामस्तु गिरिशं दाम्पत्यार्थं उमां सतीम् । ७ ।

guiel उत्तमश्लोकं तन्तुं तन्वन् पितॄन् यजेत्। रक्षाकाम: पुण्यजनानोजस्कामो मरुद्गणान् । ८ ।

राज्यकामो मनून् देवान् निर्ऋतिं त्वभिचरन् यजेत् । कामकामो यजेत् सोममकाम: पुरुषं परम् । ९ ।

अकाम: सर्वकामो वा मोक्षकाम उदारधी: idan भक्तियोगेन asta ged परम् ।१०॥

एतावानेव यजतामिह नि:श्रेयसोदय:। भगवत्यचलो भावो ae भागवतसंगत: 1221

WA wa प्रतिनिवृत्तगुणोर्मिचक्रमात्मप्रसाद sa यत्र गुणेष्सङ्घ: |
कॆवल्वसम्मतपथस्त्वथ भक्तियोग: को निर्वृतो हरिकथासु wa न कुर्यात् 1१२

Sri Suka said: | have thus told you all you asked me, viz., what should men who are
thoughtful among human beings do, when their end has arrived. (1) A seeker of pre-
eminence in sacred knowledge should worship the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the
gods). Even so he who seeks to acquire keenness of the senses should worship Indra; while
a seeker of progeny should propitiate the Prajapatis (gods presiding over creation). (2) The

seeker of prosperity should worship the divine Maya (the Lord's own potency orthe Goddess
presiding over Prakrti or Primordial Matter) and the seeker of indefatigable energy should
