Dis. 5] “~BOOK THREE 153

जजजा कौ Kets Be Hr feietetar inn teint f enintent yt trinien 9 foinininn feria ie serene ssiteet artes tot ress ated tar

भवान् भगवतो नित्यं सम्मत: सानुगस्य च । यस्य ज्ञानोपदेशाय माऽऽदिशद्भधगवान् व्रजन् । २१॥

aa ते भगवल्लीला चोगमायोपबृंहिता: | विश्वस्थित्युद्धवान्तार्थां वर्णयाम्यनुपूर्वश: 1221
Maitreya said : O pious Vidura, you have put mankind under a deep obligation by asking
me this excellent question. Your mind is already fixed on the Lord who is beyond sense-
perception; and your fame will thus be spread far and wide in this world. (18) Vidura, it is not
to be wondered at that you should have thus captivated Sri Hari, the Lord of the universe, by
your exclusive devotion, begotten as you are by no less a personage than the sage
Badarayana (Vedavyasa). (19) You are no other than the worshipful Yama, the punisher of all
creatures, descended, as a result of the imprecation pronounced by the sage Mandavya, from
the loins of the sage Vyasa (son of Satyavati) through the maid-servant and concubine of the
latter's (deceased) uterine brother (Vicitravirya, who was also born of Satyavati). (20)
Moreover, you are ever beloved of the Lord as well as of His devotees; that is why, while
departing from this world, the Lord commanded me to teach you wisdom . (21) I, therefore,
now proceed to recount in due order the Lord's pastimes, unfolded by His Yogamaya
(wonderful divine potency) for the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe. (22)

भगवानेक SACHA आत्माऽऽत्मनां fay: | आत्मेच्छानुगतावात्मा नाना मत्युपलक्षण: 123 1
स वा एष तदा द्रष्टा नापर्यद दृश्यमेकराद्। मेनेऽसन्तमिवात्मानं सुप्तशक्तिरसुप्तदूक 12% 1
सा वा एतस्य Gap: when: सदसदात्मिका | माया नाम महाभाग wae निर्ममे fay: ।२५॥ `
कालवृत्तया तु मायायां गुणमय्यामधोक्षज: । पुरुषेणात्मभूतेन वीर्यमाधत्त वीर्यवान् । २६
ततोऽभवन् महत्तत्त्वमव्यक्तात्कालचोदितात् | विज्ञानात्माऽऽत्मदेहस्थं fad व्यञ्जंस्तमोनुद: 12001
सोऽप्यंशगुणकालात्मा भगवद्दृष्टिगोचर: | आत्मानं व्यकरोदात्मा विश्चस्यास्य सिसृक्षया । २८।
महत्तत्त्वाद्विकुर्वाणादहंतत्त्वं व्यजायत | कार्यकारणक्रात्मा भूतेन्द्रयमनोमय: । २९।

वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्चेत्यहं त्रिधा । अहंतत्त्वाद्विकुर्वाणान्मनो वैकारिकादभूत् ।
वैकारिकाश्च ये देवा अर्थाभिव्यञ्जनं यत: 1301

तैजसानीन्द्रियाण्येव ज्ञानकर्ममयानि च । तामसो भूतसूक्ष्मादिर्यत: खं लिङ्गमात्मन: 132!

कालमायांशयोगेन भगवद्बीक्षितं नभ:। नभसोऽनुसृतं wel विकुर्वन्निर्ममेऽनिलम् । ३२

अनिलोऽपि विकुर्वाणो नभसोरुबलान्वित: | cet रूपतन्मात्रं ज्योतिर्लोकस्य लोचनम् 133 1

अनिलेनान्वितं ज्योतिर्विकुर्वत्परवीक्षितम्। आधत्ताम्भो रसमयं कालमायांशायोगत: ।३४॥

ज्योतिषाम्भोऽनुसंसृष्टं विकुर्वद्द्रह्मवीक्षितम्। मरहीं गन्धगुणामाधात्कालमायांशयोगत: 1341

भूतानां नभआदीनां यद्यद्भव्यावरावरम्।तेषां परानुसंसर्गाद्यथासंख्यं गुणान् fag: 1361

एते देवा: कला विष्णो: कालमायांशलिङ्गिन: | नानात्वात्स्वक्रियानीशा: प्रोचु: प्राञ्जलयो विभुम् । ३७॥
Before creation this universe existed in no other form than the Lord, who is the very Self
and the Ruler of all the Jivas (individual souls). The Spirit did not appear then in the form of
many a subject and object; for it was His will that He should remain alone. (23) Hecast His eyes
all round, but failed to perceive any object; for He shone all alone at that time. He felt as though
He were non-existent; for all His powers lay dormant, although His consciousness was wide
awake. (24) It is this energy of the all-perceiving Lord (in the form of search for an object) that
is called Maya, which is of the nature of both cause and effect. It was with the help of this Maya,
O blessed Vidura, that the almighty Lord created this universe. (25) When the equilibrium of
the three Gunas constituting this Maya was disturbed by force of Time, the transcendent Lord,
who is spiritual in essence, placed therein as Purusa, who is His own fragment. His seed in the
form of Cidabhasa (the Jiva). (26) From this Unmanifest (Maya or Prakrti), impelled by Time,
was evolved the Mahat-iativa (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which, as the dispeller of
