116 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

न ६६ 4२ न ० AO ७.ममल ERA RORA CRN १4० १ १4०१ REE ७६ ७ ६ न २ न २ न न ७ न 4 28 4 28 4७७ ^म 8 # 9 १ ७4१ न २44 १०.4 ०० १ न

addressed her aforesaid cousin (as follows):—“She is (deserving of protection like) a
daughter-in-law to you, O blessed one; you ought not to kill a female child. (4) Many a
babe, brilliant as fire, has been killed by you, impelled as you were by Providence, O
brother! This solitary and helpless girl may (kindly) be gifted to me. (5) Since । am
undoubtedly your younger cousin, whose sons have been killed and who is therefore
miserable, O lord, you ought to bestow on me, hapless as | am, this last progeny
(of mine), O dear brother!” (6)

सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैरप्सर:किन्नरोरगै: । भ: स्तूयमानेदमब्रवीत्। ११1
किं मया हतया मन्द जात: खलु तवान्तकृत् । यत्र क्व वा पूर्वशत्रुर्मा हिंसी: कृपणान् वृथा। १२1
इतिप्रध्राप्यतंदेचोप।याभगवर्तौभुवि।र्व्यबहुनम्पाब्रूह।१३।

Sri Suka went on: Thus entreated by Devaki—who wept like a most helpless
woman, hugging her daughter—and, roughly rebuking her with vehemence, the wicked
one snatched the baby from her hand. (7) Seizing by the feet his cousin's daughter,
who had just been born, Karnsa—whose affection (for his cousin) had been uprooted
by self-interest—dashed her against the (hard) surface of a slab. (8) Flying off his
hand, the younger sister of Sri Krsna instantly rose to the heavens and was seen
in the form of a goddess with eight mighty arms equipped with weapons. (9) Adorned
with ethereal wreaths, raiment, sandal-paste, and bejewelled ornaments, She wielded
(severally) a bow, a pike, an arrow, a shield, a sword, a conch and a mace (in Her
eight hands). (10) While being hymned by Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas, Apsaras,
Kinnaras and Nagas, who offered various articles of worship (to Her), She uttered
the following words:—(11) “What would you gain by My being slain, O foolish one;
for your destroyer, (who is) your erstwhile adversary (too), has been born at some
place or other. (Therefore) do not kill (other) helpless children in vain." (12) Having
warned him thus, lo! the almighty Maya (disappeared and) stayed on earth as a deity
under diverse appellations in shrines of different names. (13)°

`तयाभिहितमाकर्ण्य कंस: परमविस्मित: | देवकीं वसुदेवं च विमुच्य प्रश्रितोऽन्रवीत्। १४॥
अहोभगिन्यह्मेभम्पमयावांबतपाप्पना।पुंस्त्यग्दइवापर्त्यबहवोहिसिता: सुता: । १५॥
a त्वहं त्यक्तकारुण्यस्त्यक्तज्ञातिसुहृत् खल: | Biever a गमिष्यामि ब्रह्महेव मृत: श्वसन्। १६
द्दैवमप्यनृतं वक्ति न wal wa केवलम् । यद्विश्रम्भादहं पाप: स्वसुर्निहतवञ्छिशून्। १७॥
मा शोचतं महाभागावात्मजान् स्वकृतम्भुज: | जन्तवो न सदैकत्र दैवाधीनास्तदाऽऽसते। १८।
भुवि भौमानि भूतानि यथा यान्त्यपयान्ति च । नायमात्मा तथैतेषु विपर्येति ala भू:। १९1
यथानेवंविदो भेदो aa आत्मविपर्यय:। देहयोगवियोगौ च संसृतिर्न निवर्तते। 201
तस्मांद्भद्रेस्वक्ताग्रान्मयाव्यापादितानपि।पानुशोचयत्त:सर्वं:स्वंबृज्ञंविन्दतेष्णा;।रशा
यावद्धतोऽस्मि हन्तास्मीत्यात्मानं मन्यतेऽस्वदृक | तावत्तदभिमान्यज्ञो बाध्यबाधकतामियात्। २२

।||॥|॥|||]]]]]]]]॥|॥ 999

* Vide Il. 14-12 above.
