220 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

सि foto BoE fr ine fon et raiment saat

a तुष्टुवुर्देवनिकायकेतवो व्यवाकिरंश्चाद्भुतपुष्पवृष्टिभि: ।
लोका: परां निर्वृतिमाप्नुवंस्रयो meee गामनयन् पयोद्गुतान् । २५॥
नानारसौघा: सरितो gan आसन् मधुस्रवा: । अकृष्टपच्यौषधयो गिरयोऽबिभ्रदुन्मणीन् । २६॥

कृष्णेऽभिषिक्त एतानि सत्त्वानि कुरुनन्दन । निर्वैराण्यभवंस्तात क्रूराण्यपि feria: ।२७॥
इति गोगोकुलपति गोविन्दमभिषिच्य स: | अनुज्ञात्तो ययौ ङक्रो gat देवादिभिर्दिवम् ec!
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्ये पर्वार्धे इन्द्रस्तुतिर्नाम सप्तविद्योऽध्वाय: ।२७।

Sri Suka went on : Having thus prayed to Sri Krsna, born in the line of Dagarha, Surabhi
bathed Him with her own milk (flowing from her udders); (even So) urged by Aditi and others
(the mothers of the gods) and accompanied by celestial sages, Indra (too) bathed Him with
the water of the heavenly Ganga, brought by Airavata (Indra's elephant) in its own trunks,
and designated Him as Govinda (the Ruler of the cows). (22-23) Gandharvas, Vidyadharas,
Siddhas and Caranas, headed by Tumburu and Narada (two Gandharva chiefs noted for
their skill in vocal music), who had assembled there, sang the glory of Sri Hari, which is
capable of destroying the sins of the world; while celestial damsels beautifully danced full of
joy. (24) The foremost among the gods glorified Him and covered Him with showers of
weird flowers. (All) the three worlds derived supreme joy; while the cows drenched the
earth with their (overflowing) milk on that occasion. (25) Rivers flowed with delicious fluids
of various kinds (such as milk); trees yielded honey in profusion, bumper crops appeared
(even) on unploughed lands and mountains exhibited gems on their surface. (26) On Sti
Krsna having been crowned (thus as the Ruler of the cows), all those (wild) creatures
(which are ordinarily met with in a forest), O delight of the Kurus, became free from enmity,
O dear Pariksit, though savage by nature. (27 Having thus crowned Govinda as the Ruler
of the cows as well as of Vraja, and permitted by Him, the celebrated Indra rose to heaven
accompanied by the gods. (28)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse entitled “Indra extols Sri Krsna," in the
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,

otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

singin:
Peres

अथाष्टाविंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXVIII
Sti Krsna rescues His father from the realm of Varuna
श्रीशुक उवाच
एकादर्यां निराहार: समभ्यर्च्य जनार्दनम्। ard नन्दस्तु कालिन्द्याद्वाद्यांजलमाविशत् । १ ।
तं गृहीत्वानयद् yet वरुणस्यासुरोऽन्तिकम्। अविज्ञायासुरीं वेलां प्रविष्टमुदकं निझि । २ ।
चुक्रुशुस्तमपश्यन्त: कृष्ण रामेति गोपका: । भगवांस्तदुपश्रुत्य पितरं वरुणाहतम्।
