8 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA- । .. reef Dist
न् व न्नौ
तत्रैकावयवं ध्यायेदव्युच्छिन्नेन चेतसा । मनो निर्विषयं युक्त्वा तत: किञ्चन न स्मरेत् ।
पदं तत्परमं विष्णोर्मनो aa प्रसीदति । १९
. रजस्तमोभ्यामाक्षिप्तं faq मन ane: | यच्छेद्धारणया धीरो हन्ति या तत्कृतं मलम् । २०।
ae सन्धार्यमाणायां योगिनो भक्तिलक्षण: । आशु सम्पद्यते योग आश्रयं भद्रमीक्षत: 1281

Sri Suka replied : This enquiry of yours, made with a view to the good of the world, O
king, is most welcome. It is esteemed by the knowers of the Self and is the most important
ofall that is worth hearing, remembering or chanting. (1) There are thousands of things worth
hearing and attending to, O ruler of kings, for men who are attached to their home and
engaged in performing the five great sacrifices enjoined on the householders, and are blind
to the truth of the Self. (2) Their span of life, O king, is stolen away at night by sleep or by
copulation, and in the day-time by endeavours to make money or to provide for the family.(3)
Maddened by affection for those that are intimately connected with oneself, viz., one’s body,
progeny, wife and so on, unreal as they are, one fails to visuatize their end, though actually
witnessing it. (4) Therefore, O descendant of Bharata, he who seeks to attain the fearless
state (of Moksa) should listen to, recite and dwell on the stories of the almighty Lord Sri Hari,
the Soul of the universe. (5) To be put in mind of Sri Narayana at the last moment (of one’s
life)that alone is the supreme reward of human birth, howsoever this may be earned through
Self-Knowledge or Devotion or even through steadfastness to one's sacred duty. (6) Even
ascetics, O king, that are established in the Absolute and have reached beyond the sphere
of injunctions and inhibitions generally delight in discoursing on the virtues of Sri Hari. (7)
This Purana, which is known by the name of Bhagavata and is as sacred as the Vedas, |
studied towards the end of the Dwapara age, from my father, the sage Dwaipayana
(Vyasa).(8) Fully established as | was in the Absolute, my heart was captivated by the
pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna of excellent renown. That is how | studied this Purana, O royal
sage. (9) You being a votary of Lord Visnu, । shall recite the selfsame Purana to you; for the
mind of those who repose their faith in this Purana quickly conceives disinterested love for
Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation). (10) For those who have developed an aversion for
this world and seek to attain the fearless state, as well as for realized souls that have attained
union with God, O king, the chanting of Sri Hari’s names has been concluded to be the best
means as well as the end. (11) To aman who is negligent about his own interests, of what
use in this world are long years of life that slip away unnoticed (are spent in ignorance ) ?
Much more valuable is the hour, consciously spent, in endeavouring for the highest
good.(12) Having come to know that he was to live only an hour more, the royal sage
Khatwanga renounced everything in that short space of time, and sought refuge with SriHari,
who dispels all fear. (13) The limit of your life, O descendant of Kuru, is yet seven days from
now. Meanwhile accomplish all that is conducive to your welfare hereafter. (14) When the
hour of death comes, man should shake off all fear and cut with the sword of non-attachment
the tie of affection for his body as well as for those that are connected with it. (15) Full of self-
control, he should quit the house, bathe in the holy waters of some sacred stream orlake and,
squatting ona seat, made according to the scriptural ordinance, inaclean and secluded spot,
should repeat with his mind the holy Pranava, consisting of three parts (A,U and M). Nay,
controlling his breath, he should also subdue his mind, taking care not to forget the Pranava
(the seed of the Vedas). (16-17) Having reason for his helpmate, he should withdraw his
senses from their objects with his mind and by dint of his reason fix his mind, distracted as
it is by tendencies to action, on the blessed form of the Lord. (18) With a concentrated mind
