Dis. 26] BOOK FIVE 545

HERSHARERAR AR EET ER EAA EROSELE SETHE SERGE HE Hee SHAME HAARAATS HATA RMT ERATE Rae
ण व व व व्याया न ग झ शे हो श्रीदे दे ङ श्र LE HAAAHA HAH

been likened to a crow and falls hereafter into the worst of (all) hells, called Krmibhojana.
Born as a wormin a pool full of worms, a hundred thousand Yojanas in extent, the fellow who
(thus) ate food a part of which had neither been given to others nor offered as oblation to fire
lives there on worms, himself preyed upon (in his turn) by those very worms, and subjects
himself to (suffers) tortures for as many years as there are Yojanas constituting the extent
of that pool, unless the sin was already expiated by him (during his very lifetime). (18) Again,
the servants of Yama, Oking (Parksit), tear hereafter (in the hell called Sarndarnga) with red-
hot balls of iron or pairs of nippers the skin of the man who actually takes away here by theft
or force gold or jewels etc., belonging to a Brahmana or, otherwise than in an emergency
warranting such a course, (even) to another. (19) Again, thrashing with a whip hereafter (in
the hell called Taptasurmi) the man who actually copulates witha woman, unworthy of being
So used, and the woman, who unites sexually with a man unworthy of being so approached,
the servants of Yama force the man to embrace a red-hot iron image (of a woman) and the
woman, a similar image of a male. (20) And him who actually commits here sexual
intercourse (indiscriminately) with all (including animals), when he reaches the infernal
region (called Vajrakantakasalmali) hereafter, they place ona silk-cotton tree bristling with
adamantine thorns and (then) drag him (down along the thorns so as to tear his body). (21)
ये त्विह वै राजन्या राजपुरुषा वा अपाखण्डा धर्मसेतून् भिन्दन्ति ते सम्परेत्य वैतरण्यां निपतन्ति
भिन्नमर्यादास्तस्यां निरयपरिखाभूतायां नद्यां यादोगणैरितस्ततो भक्ष्यमाणा आत्मना न
मांसवसावाहिन्यामुपतप्यन्ते। 2214 fae वै वृषलीपतयो नष्टशौचाचारनियमास्त्यक्तलज्जा: पशुचर्यां
चरन्ति ते चापि प्रेत्य पूयविण्मूत्रश्लेष्ममलापूर्णार्णवे निपतन्ति तदेवातिबीभत्सितमश्नन्ति। २३ । ये त्विह वै
श्वगर्दंभपतयोब्राह्मणादयोमृगयाविहाराअतौर्थेचमृगाम्निघ्रन्तितानपिसम्परैताँल्लक्ष्यथूत्तान्
यमपुरुषा इषुभिर्विध्यन्ति। 2x
Again, those Ksatriyas (men belonging to the ruling class) or officers of a king who
transgress here the bounds of piety (as prescribed by the Vedas), even though they have
not embraced a heretic creed (and still profess the Vedic religion), fall on their death into (the
river called) Vaitarani for having violated restrictions (imposed by religion). Being gnawed
in that river—which serves as a most round (the region of) hell and carries in its flood ordure,
urine, pus, blood, hair, nails, bones, fat, flesh and marrow—by hosts of aquatic animals here
and there, yet not disunited from their body or life and sustained by their own sin, they feel
(greatly) distressed by the thought of the (bitter) fruits of their (evil) deeds. (22) Again, they
too, who having kept here a low-caste woman (though themselves born of a noble pedigree)
and cast to the winds (all) purity, pious conduct and restrictions (about food etc.), lead the
life of a beast, abandoning all shame, fall after death into an oceanlike pond (called Payoda),
full to the brim with pus, faeces, urine, phlegm and dirt, and feed exclusively on that most
detestable stuff. (23) Again, the servants of Yama pierce (in the hell called Prananirodha)
with arrows, as a target, those Brahmanas and others, on their death, who, rearing dogs and
donkeys here and taking delight in chase, actually kill animals otherwise than as enjoined
(by the scriptures). (24)
यातयित्वा विशसन्ति। २५ । चस्त्विह वै सवर्णां भार्यां द्विजो ra: पाययति काममोहितस्तं पापकृतममुत्र
रेत:कुल्यायां पातयित्वा रेत: सम्पाययन्ति। २६ । चे frag वै दस्यवोऽग्निदा गरदा ग्रामान् सार्थान् वा
सरभसं खादन्ति। २७॥ यस्त्विह वा अनृतं वदति साक्ष्ये द्रव्यविनिमये दाने वा कथञ्चित्स वै प्रेत्य
नरकेऽवीचिमत्यध:शिरा निरवकाशे योजनशतोच्छायाद् गिरिमूर्ध्व: सम्पात्यते ax जलमिव
स्थलमश्मपृष्ठमवभासते तदवीचिमत्तिलशो विशीर्यमाणशरीरो न म्रियमाण: पुनरारोपितो निपतति | २८ |
