38 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6
MBE He He MMW Re WE ME RE HN BY EH He HEME BEBE BY He HORT Ht Bs i We MT Be Bs Be We We He Bi Ae BE WORE Be Be wh EB He BR We OY BY We Ht Pe Ee a we Hee Be A ae BB A BY A

The Kumaras began again: Next we shall discourse to you in detail on the procedure
of (fully) hearing Srimad Bhagavata in a week. This procedure has been declared as
ordinarily observable with the help of associates and earthly possessions.(1) To begin with,
one should specially call an astrologer with due respect and inquire of him a propitious day
and time (for commencing a seven days' sacrificial session for an exposition of Srimad
Bhagavata). He should (further get together and ) set apart as much wealth as is (generally)
spentovera (girl's) wedding. (2) The months of Bhadrapada, Aswina and Kartika, Margagirsa,
Asadha and Sravana (corresponding to August, September and October, November, June
and July )—these are harbingers of Moksa for those commencing an exposition of Srimad
Bhagavata during any of these months.(3) Even in these months, O Narada, hours which
are worth eschewing must be avoided under all circumstances. Nay, others too who are
industrious should be enlisted as one’s associates in this undertaking. (4) Again, amessage
should be particularly sent to all places saying that an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is
being arranged and that people should (make it a point to) attend with their families. (5) Some
people stand remote from the stories of Sri Hari as well as from the chanting of Sri Visnu's
names and praises. It should be so arranged that they as well as women and those belonging
to the Stidra community and other such (low-born) people may be apprised of the fact.(6)
Letters should be addressed everywhere only to the votaries of Lord Visnu, who have
renounced all worldly attachments and are keen on chanting the divine names and glories.
The wording of the letter has been suggested as follows :— (7) "For seven (consecutive)
days an exceedingly rare congregation of pious men is expected to meet, and there will be
an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata full of unprecedented charm. (8) You too are requested
to come soon in order to quaff the nectar of Srimad Bhagavata, possessed as you are of an
insatiate longing for such nectar, love being foremost in your mind. (9) Even if perchance you
have no time to spare, nonetheless at all events you must come at least for a day only; (for)
even an instant on this occasion is most difficult to get."(10) Invitation should be politely
extended to them in these words and one should keep ready places of abode for all who
come. (11)

तीर्थे वापि at वापि ze वा श्रवणं मतम्। faenen agen यत्र कर्तव्यं तत्कथास्थलम् 122 |
शोधनं मार्जनं भूमेर्लेपनं धातुमण्डनम्। गृहोपस्करमुद्धृत्य गृहकोणे निवेशायेत् ।१३॥
अर्वाक्पञ्चाहतो यत्नादास्तीर्णानि प्रमेळयेत्।कर्तंव्योमण्डप:प्रोच्चै:क्कोखण्डमण्डित:।१४।
फलपुष्पदलैर्विष्ग्वितानेन विराजित: । चतुर्दिक्षु ध्वजारोपो बहुसम्पद्दिराजित: ।१५॥
ऊर्ध्व सप्तैव लोकाश्च कल्पनीया: सविस्तरम् ay विप्रा विरक्ताश्च स्थापनीया: प्रबोध्य च । १६॥
qa तेषामासनानि aden यथोत्तरम्।वक्तुश्चापि तदा दिव्यमासनं परिकल्पयेत् । १७।
उदङ्मुखो भवेद्वक्ता श्रोता a प्राङ्मुखस्तदा । प्राङ्मुखश्चेद्भवेद्वक्ता श्रोता चोदङ्मुखस्तदा ।१८॥
अथवा पूर्वदिग्नेया पूज्यपूजकमध्यत: ।श्रोतॄणामागमे प्रोक्ता देशकालादिकोविदै: ।१९॥
विरक्तो वैष्णवो fast वेदशास्त्रविशुद्धिकृत्। दृष्टान्तकुशालो धीरो वक्ता कार्योऽतिनि:स्पृह: 1201
अनेकधर्मविभ्रान्ता: स्रैणा: पाखण्डवादिन: | शुकशास्त्रकथोच्चारे त्याज्यास्ते यदि पण्डिता: 1221
ag: ud सहायार्थमन्य: स्थाप्यस्तथाविध: after: dee लोकबोधनतत्पर: 1221

The hearing of Srimad Bhagavata is commended at a place of pilgrimage or in a
woodland or even at one's (own) residence. That site (alone) should be selected for the
exposition, where an extensive ground is available. (12) Removing the household effects,
