44 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10
PERE ESRECRLERECEAE EEE EEE EEE EEE

tteteretereeesenntedenennenengernneesgr

लङ्कामायुश्च कल्यान्तं ययौ चीर्णव्रत: पुरीम्। अवकीर्यमाण: कुसुमैर्लोकपालार्पितै: पथि 1331
उपगीयमानचरित: शतधृत्यादिभिर्मुदा | गोमूत्रयावकं श्रुत्वा भ्रातरं वल्कलाम्बरम् ।३४॥
महाकारुणिकोऽतप्यज्जटिलॆ स्थण्डिलेशयम्।भरत: प्राप्तमाकर्ण्य पौरामात्यपुरोहितै: ।३५॥
पादुके शिरसि न्यस्य रामं प्रत्युद्यतोऽग्रजम्। नन्दिग्रामात् स्वञिबिराद् गीतवादित्रनि:स्वनै: 1३६१
ब्रह्मघोषेण च मुहु: पठद्भिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: । स्वर्णकक्षपताकाभिर्हमैश्चित्रध्वजै TH: 1३७1
सदश्चै रुक्मसन्नाहैर्भटै:: .पुरटवर्मभि: । श्रेणीभिर्वारमुख्याभिर्भृत्यैश्चैव पदानुगै: । ३८1
पारमेष्ठयान्युपादाय पण्यान्युच्चावचानि च । पादयोर्न्यपतत् प्रेम्णा प्रङ्किन्नहदयेक्षण: ।३९॥
पादुके न्यस्य पुरत: प्राञ्जलिर्बाष्पलोचन: | तमार्लिष्य fat deat स्नापयन् नेत्रजैर्जलै: ॥४०॥
TH लक्ष्मणसीताभ्यां विप्रेभ्यो येऽर्हसत्तमा: । तेभ्य: स्वयं नमश्चक्रे प्रजाभिश्च नमस्कृत: 1४१1
er उत्तरासङ्गान् पतिं वीक्ष्य चिरागतम् saa: कोसला माल्यै: किरन्तो ननृतुर्मुदा ॥४२॥
पादुके भरतोऽगृह्णाच्चामरव्यजनोत्तमे | विभीषण: ससुग्रीव: श्वेतच्छत्रं मरुत्सुत: ।॥४३॥
धनुर्निषङ्गाळ्छत्रुघ् सीता तीर्थकमण्डलुम्। अबिभ्रदङ्गद: wet हैमं adel नृप ॥४४॥

. पुष्पकस्थोऽन्वित: स्रीभि: स्तूयमानश्च बन्दिभि: । विरेजे भगवान् राजन् Wee इवोदित: ।४५॥

Sri Suka continued : Encouraged (commanded) by SriRama (the uncrowned King of
Kosala), Vibhisana (the youngest brother of Ravana) performed for the benefit of his
Kinsmen (Ravana and others) whatever is ordained (in the scriptures) by way of obsequies
according to the procedure laid down for a sacrifice intended to propitiate the manes. (29)
The Lord then saw in a retreat in the ASoka garden His most beloved Spouse (Sita)
emaciated due to the disease of separation from Him and seated at the foot of a Simsapa
(Asoka) tree. Observing Her in that wretched plight Sri Rama was filled with compassion.
Bestowing on Vibhisana the rulership of the Raksasa hordes, (the city of} Lanka and
longevity extending to the end of the Kalpa, and (first) helping Stta—the lotus of whose
countenance was now blooming with joy caused by His full vision—to mount the aerial car
(Puspaka), the Lord, who had (now) completed His vow of residing in a forest (for fourteen
years), stepped into the car (Himself) alongwith His two brothers (His half-brother Laksmana
and His adopted brother Sugriva) and, (further) accompanied by Hanuman, flew (back) to
His capital (Ayodhya), showered over on the way with flowers offered by the guardians of
the (various) worlds, His (heroic) deeds being joyfully celebrated (all along) by Brahma (the
creator) and others. The highly merciful Lord (however) felt (much) pained to learn about His
(younger) brother (Bharata), who, covering himself with the bark of trees, was living on barley
boiled in the urine of cows, wore matted locks (on his head) and slepton the ground strewn
with blades of (the sacred) KuSa grass. Hearing of Sri Rama having arrived, Prince Bharata
placed on his head the latter's wooden sandals (lent to him by the Lord as a token of love)
and, accompanied by the citizens (of Ayodhya), his ministers and family priests, proceeded
from Nandigrama—where he was camping (with a vow not to enter Ayodhya till Sri Rama's
return)—to meet his elder Brother in the midst of songs and sounds of musical instruments
and (further) accompanied by (great) exponents of the Vedas, repeatedly chanting in loud
tones (sacred texts from) the Vedas, by flags with gilded edges, chariots of golddecked with
flags of various colours, noble horses with trappings of gold, warriors protected by gold
armours, traders (of every description), courtezans and servants following on foot, and (also)
taking with him royal insignia (in the shape of an umbrella, chowries and so on) and (valuable)

commodities (jewels etc.), of every description (great and small by way of presents). Placing
the sandats before Sri Rama, he dropped down at His feet, his heartand eyes moistened with

