322 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

PEA MELEE HREM LEHKHKCET ER HE LEH EEK EE TH KEKE E CE HES HERE CCCHE LEH CHEE EK SEP E HEE HLH Hee
इति ca: कविर्यज्ञं भद्र रुद्रावमर्शितम्। कीर्त्यमाने हृषीकेशे संनिन्ये यज्ञभावने ixcl
War स्वेन भागेन सर्वात्मा सर्वभागभुक laa बभाष आभाष्य प्रीयमाण sara xe

Maitreya resumed: While Lord Visnu (the Controller of the senses and) the Protector
of sacrifices was thus being extolled, the wise Daksa, O blessed Vidura, renewed the
sacrifice that had been wrecked by Virabhadra. (48) Propitiated as it were by His share of
oblations (in the shape of Purodasa offered in three receptacles, vide verse 17 above), O
sinless Vidura, the Lord who is the Enjoyer of all oblations, being the Self of all, accosted
Daksa and spoke to him (as follows). (49)

[al

श्रोभगवानुवाच
अहं ब्रह्मा च शार्वश्च जगत: कारणं परम्।आत्मेश्र उपद्रष्टां स्वयंदृगविरोषण: 140 |
आत्ममायां warfare सोऽहं गुणमयीं द्विज: । सृजन् रक्षन् हरन् fad दध्रे संज्ञां क्रियोचिताम् । ५१॥
तस्मिन् ब्रह्मण्यद्वितीये केवले परमात्मनि । ब्रह्मरुद्रौ च भूतानि भेदेनाज्ञोऽनुप्यति 1421
यथा पुमान्न स्वाङ्गेषु शिर:पाण्यादिषु क्वचित्। पारक्यबुद्धिं कुरुते एवं भूतेषु मत्पर: 1431
त्रयाणामेकभावानां यो न पश्यति @ fear सर्वभूतात्मनां ae स जान्तिमधिगच्छति ux
The Lord said : The supreme cause of the universe, | am also Brahma (the creator) and
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). | am the Self, the Lord and the Witness (of all), self-
effulgent and unqualified. (60) Embracing My own Maya (deluding potency), consisting of
the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), it is | who create, protect and destroy the universe and
have assumed (diverse) names (such as Brahma, Visnu and Siva) appropriate to My
functions, O Brahmana ! (51) It is in such a Brahma (the Absolute), the supreme Spirit, who
is one without a second, that the ignorant fool views Brahma, Rudra and other beings as
distinct entities. (52) Just as a man never conceives his own head, hands and other limbs
as belonging to anyone else, even so he who is devoted to Me does not regard his fellow-
creatures as distant from himself. (53) He who sees no difference between Us three
(Brahma, Rudra and Myself)—who are identical in essence and the very selves of all living
beings—attains (everlasting) peace, O Daksa. (54)

मत्रेय उवाच
एवं भगवताऽऽदिष्ट:- प्रजापतिपतिर्हरिम्। अर्चित्वा क्रतुना स्वेन देवानुभयतोऽयजत् 44!
रुद्रे च स्वेन भागेन ह्युपाधावत्समाहित: | कर्मणोदवसानेन सोमपानितरानपि ।
उदवस्य सहत्विग्भि: सस्नराववभृथं तत: । ५६॥
तस्मा अप्यनुभावेन स्वेनैवावाप्तराधसे। ed wa मतिं दत्त्वा freon fed aq: iu!

Maitreya went on: Thus enlightened by the Lord, Daksa ( the chief of the lords of created
beings) worshipped Sri Hari through the sacrifice sacred to Himself (viz., the Trikapalesti),
and then the other gods both through the principal and secondary types of sacrifices. (55)
With a concentrated mind he also waited upon Lord Rudra with the share due to Him (in the
form of the remains of the sacrifice) and (even so) upon the other gods, including those that
drink the Soma juice and those that do not, through the rite called Udavasana (which is
performed at the end of a sacrifice); and, having (thus) concluded the sacrifice, he then
performed along with the priests the sacred ablutions known by the name of Avabhrtha. (56)
And having blessed Daksa—who had by his own greatness attained supernatural powers—
with devotion to righteousness the gods ascended to heaven. (57)
