22 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6

RESCECEE ECE SESE LEE EEE ER ELL ESET EELS REECE S EHEOE LEER ECR EUR ककक शाजजा ककक

Garam: स राजा wea ब्रह्मणि वासुदेवे ।

क्रियाकलापै: समुवाह भक्तिं ययाऽऽविरिञ्च्यान् Prats । २५॥

अथाम्बरीषस्तनवेषु राज्यं समानज्ञीलेषु विसृज्य धीर: ।

वनं विवेशात्मनि वासुदेवे मनो दधद् ध्वस्तगुणप्रवाह: । २६॥
इत्येतत् पुण्यमाख्यानमम्बरीषस्य भूषते: | संकीर्तयन्ननुध्यायन् भक्तो भगवतो भवेत् । २७॥

Sri Suka resumed : Having thus acclaimed the king and asking leave of him, Durvasa,
who was highly gratified, rose through the heavens to Brahmaloka (the region of Brahma),
attainable (only) through disinterested action. (22) A (whole) year had elapsed before the
sage, who had gone out (in search of a quarter to Brahmaloka and other regions), returned
(to the capital of Ambarisa). And, longing for a sight of the sage, the king—so the tradition
goes—subsisted on (mere) water (all these months). (23) And, when Durvasa left, the said
Ambarisa ate the (remnant of) food that had been rendered most holy by being partaken of
by a Brahmana (the sage Durvasa). And perceiving the evil plightand (ultimate) redemption
of the seer (Durvasa), as well as his own firmness in remaining without any food for a whole
year), he thoughtit (all) to be a glory of the Supreme. (24) Possessed of many such qualities,
the said emperor (Ambarisa) practised devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the supreme Spirit and
the ultimate Reality, through his multifarious duties (that stood offered to Him)—by virtue of
which (devotion) he regarded (all) blessings including the position of Brahma (the creator)
as (no better than so many) forms of damnation. (25) Now, leaving his kingdom to the care
of his sons, who were (all) possessed of a disposition similar to his own, the wise Ambarisa
retired to a forest. (And) fixing his mind on Lord Vasudeva, his own self, he (eventually) had
his round of births and deaths brought to a close. (26) Anyone reciting and repeatedly
musing on this aforesaid sacred story of Emperor Ambarisa bids fair to become a devotee
of the Lord. (27)

Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled “The story of Ambarisa," in Book
Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavaia-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

क्तय
eI ESE

BA षष्ठोऽध्याय:

Discourse VI
The posterity of Ikswaku : the stories of Mandhata
and the sage Saubhari
श्रीगुक उवाच
formu: केतुमाञ्छम्भुरम्बरीषसुतास्त्रय: | विरूपात् पृषदश्वोऽभूत् तत्पुत्रस्तु रथीतर: 1 १ ।
रथीतरस्याप्रजस्य भार्यायां तन्तवेऽर्थित: | अङ्गिरा जनयामास ब्रह्मवर्चस्विन: सुतान्। २ ।
एते क्षेत्रे प्रसूता वै पुनस्त्वाङ्गिरसा: स्मृता: । रथीतराणां प्रवरा: क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातय: । ३ ।
क्षुवतस्तु मनोर्जज्ञे genet: सुत:। तस्य पुत्रशतज्येष्ठा विकुक्षिनिमिदण्डका: । ४ ।
