Dis. 3] BOOK THREE 145

Son nin 2 eA AEE N TEM ERA LC EHNA CE CRENA TURN OE CCE HEED HET T HOT TN HERAT

it is yet negligible wnen compared to the irresistible might of the Yadus (My own kinsmen
and proteges), still flourishing under the protection of My part manifestations (Pradyumna
and others). (14) Drunk with wine, when they quarrel among themselves, their eyes suffused
with blood, that will be the only way of exierminating them and no other. As a matter of fact,
they will disappear as soon as | get ready (to depart for My eternal Abode)." (15)
एवं सञ्चिन्त्य भगवान् स्वराज्ये स्थाप्य धर्मजम् । नन्दयामास सुहृद: साधूनां वर्त्म दर्शयन् ।१६॥
उत्तरायां धृत: पूरोर्वश: साध्वभिमन्युना । स a द्रौण्यस्त्रसंछिन्न: पुनर्भगवता ya: । १७॥
छैम्याजयद्धपसुतमश्वपेधेस्रिधिर्विथु: । सोऽपि क्ष्मामनुजे रक्षन् रेमे कृष्णमनुव्रत: । १८।
भगवानपि विश्चात्मा लोकवेदपथानुग: | कामान् सिषेवे द्वार्वत्यामसक्त: सांख्यमास्थित: 1281
स्निग्धस्मिताबलोकेन arn पीयूषकल्पया । चरित्रेणानवद्येन श्रीनिकेतेन चात्मना ।२०॥
लोकममुं चैव रमयन् सुतरां यदून्।रेमे क्षणदया दत्तक्षणस्रीक्षणसोहद: । २१।
qa रममाणस्य संवत्सरगणान् बहून्। गृहमेधेषु योगेषु विराग: समजायत । २२
दैवाधीनेषु कामेषु दॆवाधीन: स्वयं पुमान्। को विस्रम्भेत योगेन योगेश्वरमनुव्रत: 1231
Pondering thus, the Lord securely placed king Yudhisthira (the son of Dharma) on his
(ancestral) throne and brought delight to His near and dear ones by showing them the way
of the righteous (by His own example). (16) The seed of Puru's line, that was duly planted
(in the shape of Pariksit) in the womb of Uttara by Abhimanyu (Arjuna's son through
Subhadra, Sri Krsna's own sister) and was later torn up by the missile (Brahmastra)
discharged by ASwatthama (the son of Drona), was eventually preserved by the Lord. (17)
The almighty Lord persuaded Yudhisthira to perform no less than three ASwamedhas
(horse-sacrifices); and the emperor too, devoted as he was to Sri Krsna, led a happy life,
protecting the earth with the help of his younger brothers (Bhima and others). (18) The Lord
as well, who is the Soul of the universe, enjoyed the pleasures of life at Dwaraka, keeping
to the path chalked out by the Vedas and the Smrtis, and remaining unattached to those
pleasures in conformity with the spirit of Sankhyayoga (according to which itis matter in the
form of the senses that reacts on matter in the form of their objects, the spirit ever remaining
aloof as a witness). (19) Delighting this as well as the other world (heaven), and the Yadus
in particular, by His endearing smiles and loving glances, His words sweet as nectar, His
irreproachable conduct and His person, which was the abode of all charm and splendour,
He revelled by night with His consorts, affording them the pleasure of His company and
showing them momentary affection. (20-21) As He thus enjoyed life for many years He felt
an aversion for the performance of religious duties binding on a householder and conducive
to the pleasures of sense. (22) What man, then, who is in the power of Providence and who
seeks to please Sri Krsna (the Master of Yogas) through the practice of Devotion, would set
his heart on the pleasures of sense, which are in the gift of Providence ? (23)

पुर्यां कदाचित्क्रीडद्भिर्यदुभोजकुमारकै: । कोपिता मुनय: ङोपुर्भगवन्मतकोविदा: 12%

तत: कतिपयैर्मासैर्वृष्णिभोजान्धकादय: । ययु: sad dep रथेर्देवविमोहिता: 124)

तत्र स्नात्वा पितॄन्देवानृषींश्चैव तदम्भसा । तर्पयित्वाथ विप्रेभ्यो गावो बहुगुणा ददु: ।२६॥

हिरण्यं wd vat वासांस्यजिनकम्बलान्।यानं रथानिभान् कन्या धरां वृत्तिकरीमपि 1201

aa चोरुरसं तेभ्यो दत्त्वा wacom गोविप्रार्थासव: a: प्रणेमुर्भुवि मूर्धभि: 1221

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे UNAS संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे विदुरोद्धवसंवादे तृतीयोऽध्याय: ।३।

Once, when the youths of the Yadus and Bhojas were playing in the city (of Dwaraka),
they offended some sages, who in their turn pronounced a curse on the boys, knowing as
