Dis. 14] BOOK FIVE 483

६..७.३.३.३ ३३७ ३..३..६.३ .६ . ३३ 3.3.3..2.2:2६..३.६.६-३.-६-य-दे-}.३४.2.६..2..६.२-3 RATHER EERE HOHE ERA HEHE ERA HAH HT RO
ज्र्त्त

for whose sake they entered into enmity with others, accounting it as their own, and which
they had ultimately to abandon, themselves withdrawing (from the scene). (40) Then clinging
to the creeper of Karma (action in the shape of remedial measures) and somehow rid of the
hellish tortures in the shape of ailment and other troubles, they revert to the path of
transmigration as aforesaid and join (back) the company of men; and similar is the case with
those who have risen above (to the higher regions such as heaven). (41)

Thus do they sing of Bharata's career :—

आर्षभस्येह राजर्षेर्मनसापि महात्मन: | arqaeatéfa नृपो मक्षिकेव गरुत्मत:।४२॥

यो दुस्त्यजान्दारसुतान् West हृदिस्पृश:। जहौ युवैव मलवदुत्तमश्लोकलालस:।४३।
यादुंप्त्यनंन्क्षिळ्ळिस्त्रजनाथदारान्प्रस्यां श्रियं Great: सदयावलोकाम्।
नैच्छन्नृपस्तदुचितं महतां मधुद्विट् सेवानुरक्तमनसामभवोऽपि फल्गु:।४४॥
यज्ञाय धर्मपतये विधिनैषुणाय योगाय सांख्यशिरसे प्रकृतीश्वराय।
नारायणाय हरये AR yet हास्यन्मृगत्वमपि य: समुदाजहार।४५।

No (other) king can follow even mentally the example of the high-souled royal sage
Bharata (the son of Lord Rsabha) any more than a fly can think of emulating the speed of
Garuda (the king of birds). (42) (With a heart) full of longing for the Lord of excellent renown,
he abandoned, while still young, (his) wife and sons, kinsmen and kingdom, (so) difficult to
renounce and (so) delightful to the heart, even as one would throw away excrement. (43)
(Lo!) he did not long for (the sovereignty of) the earth, sons, kinsfolk, riches and wife—so
hard to renounce—nor even for Sri (the goddess of fortune), who, though coveted (even) by
the foremost gods, cast Her gracious look on him. This was (only) as it should be; for, in the
eyes of exalted souls whose mind is devoted to the service of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the
demon Madhu), even liberation (immunity from rebirth) is of no value. (44) "Hail to Lord Sri
Hari, who is Yajna (personified), the Defender of righteousness, punctiliously carrying out
the injunctions of scriptures (Himself in order to set a noble example before the world at
large), an embodiment of Yoga (the diverse methods of God-Realization) and the principal
theme (as Brahma) of Sankhya (the science of Self-Realization), the Lord of Prakrti (Maya,
the divine energy that brings forth this cosmos), the Ruler of all Jivas!"thus did he loudly
(piteously) and distinctly pray even before casting off the form of a deer. (45)

य sé भागवतसभाजितावदातगुणकर्मणो राजर्षेर्भरतस्यानुचरितं स्वस्त्ययनमायुष्यं धन्यं यशस्यं

PATA TNS वानुश्रृणोत्याख्यास्यत्यभिनन्दति च सर्वा एवाशिष आत्मन आशास्ते न काञ्चन परत इति । ४६ |

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां पञ्चमस्कन्धे भरतोपाख्याने पारोक्ष्यविवरणं नाम चतुर्दशोऽध्याय: 1 OSs
Whosoever repeatedly listens to or recites and celebrates this story of the royal sage
Bharata, whose spotless virtues and actions are extolled (even) by (eminent) devotees of
the Lorda story which brings good fortune and confers longevity, wealth, celebrity, heavenly
bliss and even final beatitude— attains all his desired objects by himself and seeks nothing

from others. (46)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled “The allegorical meaning (of the description
of the forest of mundane existence) elucidated, * forming part of the story of
Bharata, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

wah Let £ nat १६
CPOLPENEN ELIS
