276 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

WLERAHAOHGHHKERERGOKEHHEKAERKOKCVHRESHHORE KEES EL ER AEE ककक कौत् तीत्री क्तैत्ततौ क HEARTH

जन्तुरुवाच
तस्योपसन्नमवितुं जगदिच्छयात्तनानातनोर्भुवि चलच्चरणारविन्दम् |
सोऽहं व्रजामि aot ह्यकुतोभयं मे येनेदृशी गतिरदर्श्यसतोऽनुरूपा ।१२॥
यस्त्वत्र ag इव कर्मभिरावृतात्मा भूतेन्द्रियाशायमयीमवलम्ब्य मायाम् ।
amet विशुद्धमविकारमखण्डबोधमातप्यमानहृदयेऽवसितं नमामि 123 |
a: पञ्चभूतरचिते “wea: शारीरेच्छन्नो यथेन्द्रियगुणार्थचिदात्मकोऽहम् |
ततेनाविकुण्ठमहिमानमृषिं तमेनं ae ut प्रकृतिपूरुषयो: पुमांसम् । १४॥
यन्माययोरुगुणकर्मनिबन्धनेऽस्मिन् arate पथि चरंस्तदभिश्रमेण |
नष्टस्मृति: पुनरवं प्रवृणीत लोकं geen कया महदनुग्रहमन्तरेण । १५
WH यदेतददधात्कतम: स देवस्रैकालिकं स्थिरचरेष्ननुवर्तितांशा: ।
तं जीव्रकर्मपदवीमनुवर्तमानास्तापत्रयोपशामनाय वयं भजेम IRE

The human Soul says : | take shelter in the lotus-feet, which once trod the earth and
bring immunity from all fear, of Him who of His own sweet will assumes various forms in order
to protect the universe—which has sought His protection (from time to time)—and by whom
| have been thrown into such a condition as this, which is quite becoming of my wicked
self. (12) | bow to Him who, having embraced Maya in the form of this psychophysical
organism (consisting of the gross elements, the Indriyas and the mind) in this womb, appears
as bound by virtuous and sinful acts, and has His reality screened by Maya, but who flashes
on my afflicted heart as absolutely pure(untainted by Maya), immutable and possessed of
wisdom which knows no break. (13) Though bodiless (in reality), । appear as clothed in a body
made up of the five elements and as consisting of the Indriyas, the Gunas (modes of
Prakrti),the objects of senses and the ego (a reflection of the intelligent Spirit). Therefore,
| adore the all-knowing Supreme Person, the Controller of both Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa
(Spirit), whose glory can never be obscured by such veils (the body etc.). (14) Having
forgotten his own self under the influence of the Lord's Maya, the embodied soul traverses
the path of Samsara (transmigration)—strewn with numerous shackles of Karma, having
their source in the three Gunas—undergoing hardships of many kinds. By what other
expedient, then, than through the grace of that Supreme Being can he expect to realize his
true nature?(15) Who else than that Lord has bestowed upon me this knowledge of the past,
present and future? For itis He who dwells in all animate and inanimate beings as the Inner
Controller, who is no other than a part manifestation of the Lord Himself. Therefore, for
soothing our threefold agony it is Him that we adore—we who are playing the role of aJiva
as a result of our Karma (destiny). (16)

देह्यन्यदेहविवरे जठराम्निनासृग्विण्मून्रकूपपतितो भृशतप्तदेह: ।
इच्छन्नितो विवसितुं गणयन् स्वमासान् निर्वास्यते कृपणधीर्भगवन् कदा नु । १७।
येनेदृशीं गतिमसौ दशमास्य ga संग्राहित: पुरुदयेन भवादृशेन |
स्वेनैव तुष्यतु कृतेन स दीननाथ: को नाम dara विनाञ्जलिमस्य कुर्यात् । १८।
Fallen into a sink of blood, faeces and urine within the abdomen of another body (the
body of the mother) and with his own body scorched by the (mother's) gastric fire, this

embodied soul (my own Self) is anxious to get out of it, counting his months (the period of
gestation). Oh, when shall this wretched sou! be released (from this confinement), O Lord? (17)
