Dis. 4] BOOK TEN 115

म्नि # क न न १4 ATA न RAAT RR TREE ARERR OTHER 49 ORE ORE REE न EERE E TERRE RE EO ee

respite at intervals so as to avoid continued hardship to Vasudeva), the Yamuna river
(presided over by a deity of the same name and the younger sister of Yama, the god
of retribution), (even though) covered with foam due to waves set up by the force of its
deep flood, and studded with hundreds of fearful male-storms, afforded passage (to the
divine Sri Krsna) by becoming fordable (even) as the ocean did (of yore) to Lord Sri
Rama (the Spouse of Laksmi disguised as Sita). (50) Reaching Nanda’s Vraja and
finding there the cowherds headed by Nanda buried in sleep under the influence of
Yogamaya (representing the trance-sleep of Lord Visnu), Vasudeva (the son of Sura)
placed his son on the bed of Yasoda (by her side) and returned (forthwith) to the palace
(of Karnsa), taking’ with him (in exchange) her (divine) daughter. (51) Laying the (divine)
girl on Devaki’s bed and putting the chains about his feet (again), Vasudeva now stood
confined as before. (52) Yasoda, Nanda’s wife, too simply came to know of a child
having been born (to her) but did not notice its sex, exhausted (as she was by the throes
of parturition) and rendered unconscious by Yogamaya. (53)
Thus ends the third discourse, bearing on the Advent of Sri Krsna, in the first
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

३ १3
rE ee

अथ चतुर्थोऽध्याय:
Discourse IV

Stipping from the grip of Karnsa, Yogamaya ascends
to the heavens and utters a prophecy
श्रीशुक उवाच

बहिरन्त:पुरद्वार: सर्वा: पूर्ववदावृता: | ततो बालध्वनिं श्रुत्वा गृहपाला: समुत्थिता:। १।

ते तु तूर्णमुपव्रन्य देवक्या गर्भजन्म aqi आचख्युर्भोजराजाय यदुद्विग्न: प्रतीक्षते। 21

स तल्पात् तूर्णमुत्थाय कालोऽयमिति विह्वल: । सूतीगृहमगात् तूर्णं प्रस्खलन् मुक्तमूर्धज:। ३।

तमाह wat देवी कृपणा meu सती । स्नुषेयं wa कल्याण fad मा edie

बहवो हिंसिता भ्रात: शिशव: पावकोपमा: । त्वया दैवनिसृष्टेन पुत्रिकैका प्रदीयताम्। ५।

wae ते ह्यवरजा दीना हतसुता प्रभो । दातुमर्हसि मन्दाया aga चरमां प्रजाम्। ६|

Sri Suka resumed: (Vasudeva having returned to the palace,) all the outer
(main) gates as well as those of the gynaeceum were closed as before. Then,
on hearing the cry of a babe, the guards of the palace got wide awake. (1) Hastily
approaching Karhsa, they now reported to the ruler of the Bhojas of that (particular)
childbirth (the birth of the eighth child) of Devaki, which he anxiously awaited. (2)
Rising hurriedly from his bed and distressed to think that the baby was his
death, he went in all haste to the lying-in-chamber with tottering steps and dishevelled
hair. (3) Wretched as she was, the shining and virtuous lady pathetically

* Vasudeva can be accused here of callousness by the unwary reader in removing his own son and celiberately
delivering the child of his Iriend, Nanda, to the hands ol Death. But thoughtful readers would acquit him of this charge, knowing
as they do thal Vasudeva did all this under the express command ol the Lord Himse!f, as is clear from verse 47 above.
