Dis. 2] BOOK TEN 105
pon a

sor EEE ES EEE EEE यत्ते EEE NIA hI

destinies) of men seeking various boons and as the bestower of all desired blessings. (10)
Men will erect temples (sacred to you) on earth and give (diverse) appellations (to you) such
as Durga, Bhadrakall, Vijaya, Vaisnavi, Kumuda, Candika, Krsna, Madhavi and Kanyaka,
Maya, Narayani, lsani, Sarada and Ambika. (11-12) People on earth will call the son of Rohini
Sankarsana, particularly because of his being taken out of the womb (of Devaki); by the
name of Rama because of his giving delight to the world and Bala because of his pre-
eminence among those possessed of strength."(13)

सन्दिष्टैवं भगवता तथेत्योमिति तद्व्य: । प्रतिगृह्य परिक्रम्य गां गता तत् तथाकरोत् । १४॥

गर्भे प्रणीते देवक्या रोहिणीं योगनिद्रया । अहो विस्रंसितो गर्भ इति पौरा विचुक्रुशु: । १५

Thus instructed by the Lord and accepting His command with the words, "O yes, letit be

so !" and going round Him from left 10 right (as a mark of respect), the goddess descended
on earth and carried out His behest as she was told. (14) When the embryo in the womb of
Devaki was transferred to that of Rohini by Yogamaya (who represents the Lord's trance-
sleep at the time of universal dissolution), the people of Mathura wailed aloud saying, "Ah!
the embryo (in the womb of Devaki) has perished !" (15)

भगवानपि विश्वात्मा भक्तानामभयङ्कर: । आविवेशांशाभागेन मन आनकदुन्दुभे: ।१६।
स for पौरुषं am भ्राजमानो यथा रवि: । दुरासदोऽतिदुर्धर्षो भूतानां सम्बभूव ह ।१७॥
दधार सर्वात्मकमात्मभूतं काष्ठा यथाऽऽनन्दकरं मनस्त: ।१८॥

सा देवकी सर्वजगन्निवासनिवासभूता fet न रेजे ।

ames मे प्राणहरो हरिर्गुहां ga श्रितो यन्न पुरेयमीदृशी ico
fang तस्मिन् करणीयमाञशु मे यदर्थतन्त्रो न विहन्ति विक्रमम् ।
fam: स्वसुर्गुरुमत्या वधोऽयं ome: श्रियं हन्त्यनुकालमायु: ।२१॥
स ow we we सम्परेतो वर्तेत dpe
देहे मृते a मनुजा: शपन्ति गन्ता तमोऽन्धं तनुमानिनो ध्रुवम् ।२२॥
इति घोरतमाद् भावात् सन्निवृत्त: स्वयं प्रभु:। आस्ते प्रतीक्षंस्तज्जम हरेर्वैरानुबन्धकृत् । २३
आसीन: संविशंस्तिष्ठन् भुञ्जान: पर्यटन् महीम्। चिन्तयानो हृषीकेशमपश्यत् a जगत् । २४1
The Lord too, who is the Sout of the universe and rids His devotees of (all) fear, entered
the mind of Vasudeva with all His divine potencies constituting parts of His being as it were.
(16) Carrying {in him) the glorious presence of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) and
(consequently) shining as the sun, Vasudeva evidently grew to be most formidable and hard
io approach in the eyes of (all) living beings. (17) Thereupon, just as the eastern quarter
bears the moon (the delighter of all), the glorious Devaki conceived in her mind the Lord
carrying (with Him all) His divine potencies (constituting so many parts of His Being), and
embodying the good-luck of the world—the Lord who comprises all and represented her very
self—duly communicated (to her) by Vasudeva (through mere signt even as a preceptor
would impress on the mind of his disciple a mental image of the Lord). (18) !mprisoned within
(the four walls of) the palace of Karnsa (the chief of the Bhojas) like an enclosed flame or like
useful knowledge pent up in (the mind of ) a (Selfish) scholar who keeps his knowledge to
himself, Devaki, who had (now) turned into an abode of the Lord Himself (the abode of the
