Dis. 6`] ` BOOK TWELVE 693

SRR MR RN HARARE HARE RE RRA ABI SSAA AAR AAA ARACEAE LIED AIBA BIA BATE AICI ERE ERB RERR ACRE

prescribed by the Vedas thrice everyday (morning.and evening as well as at midday). (This
passage explains the meaning of the second foot of the Gayatri-Mantra. (68) As the Inner
Controller of the multitudes of immobile and mobile creatures in this (visible) universe, which,
as is well-known,constitute Your own bodies, Youbeing their very Self, You direct their mind,
senses and vital airs, which are (all) material (and therefore inert). (This explains the meaning
of the third and last foot of the Gayatri-Mantra.) (69) Seeing this world swallowed by the
diabolical python bearing the name of darkness and wearing a most dreadful aspect, and
(therefore) lying unconscious as though dead, You a lone rouse it by Your mere glance out
of compassion, supremely compassionate as You are, and direct it thrice everyday to the
adoration of the Supreme Spirit, leading to the highest good under the name of their own
sacred duty. Like a king You go about instilling fear in (the heart of) the wicked and waited
upon at every point by the guardians of the quarters with offerings of water and lotus buds
in their joined palms. (70-71) Obviously for the same reason, O Lord, do | resort to Your
lotus-feet, bowed to by those (Indra and others) adored in all the three worlds, desirous as
] am of receiving knowledge of the portions of Yajurveda (hitherto) unknown by anyone
else. That is all. (72)

सूत उवाच

एवं स्तुत: स भगवान् वाजिरूपधरो हरि: । यजूंष्ययातयामानि मुनयेऽदात् प्रसादित: 1931
यजुर्भिरकरोच्छाखा दशपञ्च शङतैर्विभु: । जगृहुर्वाजसन्यस्ता: काण्वमाध्यन्दिनादय: ।७४॥
Se: सामगस्यासीत् सुमन्तुस्तनयो मुनि: । सुन्वांस्तु तत्सुतस्ताभ्यामेकैकां प्राह संहिताम् ।७५॥
सुकर्मा चापि तच्छिष्य: सामवेदतरोर्महान्। सहस्रसंहिताभेदं चक्रे साम्नां ततो द्विज: । ७६॥
हिरण्यनाभ: कौसल्य: पौष्यञ्जिश्च सुकर्मण: | शिष्यो जगृहतुश्चान्य आवन्त्यो ब्रह्मवित्तम: 1७७1
उदीच्या: सामगा: ren आसन् पञ्चशतानि वै । पोष्यञ्ज्यावन्त्ययोश्चापि तांश्च प्राच्यान् प्रचक्षते । ७८1
लौगाक्षिर्माङ्गलि: कुल्य: कुसीद: कुक्षिरेव च । पौष्यञ्जिशिष्या aye: संहितास्ते ae AAT । ७९॥
कृतो हिरण्यनाभस्य चतुर्विंशतिसंहिता: | शिष्य ऊचेस्वशिष्येभ्य: Ser आवन्त्य आत्मवान् । ८०1

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पासमहंस्यां संहितायां SRA वेदशाखाप्रणयनं नाम षष्ठोऽध्याय: ।६।

Sita continued : Extolled thus, the celebrated and glarious Sun-god felt (highly)
propitiated and, assuming the form of a horse, taught the sage such portions of the
Yajurveda as were (hitherto) unknown to anyone else. (73) Out of the countless Mantras
of Yajurveda (revealed to him by the Sun-god) the powerful Yajfiavalkya compiled (as
many as) fifteen SAkhas known by the name of Vajasani. Sages Kanva, Madhyandina and
others learntthem. (74) Sage Sumantu was the son of Jaimini, the chanter of Samaveda (as
taught to him by Vedavyasa—vide verse 53 above} and Sunvan was the son of Sumantu.
Jaimini taught one collection to each of them. Then Sukarma another Brahmana pupil of
Jaimini, who had a mighty intellect, divided the tree of Samaveda into a thousand
coliections of psalms. (75-76) Hiranyanabha of Kosala, and Pausyaiiji, the two pupils of

_Sukarma; and a third pupil, Avantya (by name), the foremost of the knowers of Brahma,
learnt them. (77) Pausyafji and Avantya as well as Hiranyanabha had, it is said, five
hundred pupils, who hailed from the north (and learnt as many Sakhas of Samaveda).
(Yet) antiquarians call them Pracyas (perhaps construing this word in the sense of the
ancient and not in the sense of easterners). (78) Laugaksi, Mangali, Kulya, Kusida and
Kuksi, (other) pupils of Pausyanji, learnt a hundred collections each.(79) Krta, another
