314 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 49

SPOR OR St ROSE SII IT RS BR CEE CW, SERIO IIE SS See seer ee so aren en tteseirnscatetid

(Kunti, my aunt): so we have heard. (33) Sure enough, the feeble-minded King Dhrtarastra
(the son of Ambika), who is (at the same time) blind and follows the will of his vile son
(Duryodhana), does not behave impartially towards his nephews. (34) Go (therefore) and
ascertain his behaviour (towards them) now—whether it is good or bad. Having definitely
known it, we shall so arrange that the welfare of our relations (the Pandavas) may be
ensured.” (35) Having thus duly instructed Akrura, the almighty Lord Sri Krsna (who
alleviates the suffering of His devotees) then returned direct to His own residence alongwith
Sankargana (Balarama) and Uddhava. (36)

Thus ends the forty-eighth discourse in the first half of Book Ten
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

tat Pitt:
Pewee Spey

अथैकोनपञ्चाहात्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLIX

Akrira's visit to Hastinapura

a च
स गत्वा हास्तिनपुरं पौरबेन्द्रयञ्चोऽङ्कितम् ext तत्राम्बिकेयं सभीष्मं fer पृथाम् । १ ।
चथावदुपसङ्घम्य बद्युभिगक्खि:।म्रास्ते:ह्यांस्कांचापृच्छठ्ययम्।इ।
उवास कतिचिन्मासान् राज्ञो वृत्तविवित्सया ! दुष्पजस्वाल्पसारस्य रखलच्छन्दानुवर्तिन: । ४ ।
तॆजओजोवल॰वीर्यंप्नश्रयार्दोश्चमड्णाम्.टं । प्रजानुरागं पार्थेषु न संहद्भिश्चिकीर्षितम् । ५ ।
कृतं च ante गरदानाद्यपेशलम्। आचख्यौ सर्वमेवास्मै पृथा fer एव च । ६ ।

Sri Suka began again ; Going to Hastinapura, marked with the glory of the kings of
PUru's race, Akrura saw there Dhrtarastra (the son of Ambika) accompanied by Bhisma,
(nay,) Vidura, Prtha (the mother of the Pandava brothers), Bahlika (uncle of Bhisma)
alongwith his son (Somadatta), Drona (the son of Bharadwaja), accompanied by Krpa (a
scion of sage Gotama), (as well as) Karna, Suyodhana (Duryodhana), ASwatthama (the son
of Drona), Yudhisthira and his four brothers (the sons of Pandu) and other friends. (1-2)
Meeting his relatives in an appropriate manner, Akrura (the son of Gandini) was duly
questioned by them about the welfare of their relatives (at Mathura), and himself enquired
about their well-being (in return). (3) He stayed there for some months with intent to ascertain
the conduct (towards the sons of Pandu) of the king (Dhrtarastra), who had vile sons andlittle
moral strength and followed the will of the wicked (his brother-in-law Sakuni, Karna and
others). (4) Prtha as well as Vidura* (another half-brother of Dhrtarastra and a true friend and
benefactor of the Pandavas) told him (Akriira) of all the evil—in the shape of administering
poison etc—ihat had (already) been done and was (further) sought to be done by
Duryodhana and others (the sons of Dhrtarastra), who were envious of the majesty, military

* For the story of Vidura see Book III.
