640 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18

detrei ir Berke tere Bee fe br te ted te Petter tt ee eA AA AEA ATA ER AREA EH ERE TEER EEH Eee e OE EE ANI H
मा ae भ्रातरो ve यूयमित्याह कौशिक: | अनन्यभावान् पार्षदानात्मनो मरुतां गणान् । ६४॥
न ममार दितेर्गर्भ: श्रीनिवासानुकम्पया । बहुधा कुलिशक्षुण्णो द्रौण्यस्रेण यथा भवान् । ६५॥
सकृदिष्टाऽदिपुरुषं पुरुषो याति साम्यताम्।संवत्सरं किञ्चिदूनं दित्या यद्धरिरर्चित: 1६६1
agian पञ्चाशद्देवास्ते मरुतोऽभवन्। cate मातृदोषं a हरिणा सोमपा: कृता: । ६७1
दितिरुत्थाय =a कुमाराननलप्रभान्।इन्द्रेणे सहितान् देवी पर्यतुष्यदनिन्दिता । ६८1
अथेन्द्रमाह ताताहमादित्यानां भयावहम्। अपत्यमिच्छन्त्यचरं व्रतमेतत्सुदुष्करम् ।६९॥
एक: सङ्कल्पित: पुत्र: सप्त सप्ताभवन् कथम्। यदि ते विदितं पुत्र सत्यं कथय मा मृषा Ivo!
Expressing her willingness (to undertake the vow) in the words "Very well", the strong-willed
Diti, O Pariksit, then concieved the seed of KaSyapa and she also duly undertook the (sacred)
vow. (55) Having come to know the intention of his mother's sister (Diti), O respectful king, the
clever Indra waited upon Diti, who was living in a hermitage (as a hermitess), through (personal)
service (of every kind). (56) He fetched everyday from thewoodsat the proper time flowers, fruits
roots, small pieces of wood for the sacrificial fire and blades of (the sacred) Kusa grass as well
as (sacred) leaves and sprouts, earth and water. (57) Keen to discover a slip in the observance
on the part of Diti, who had been duly adhering to the vow, O Pariksit, the croocked Indra
continued to serve her like a hunter disguised as a game (to remove its suspicion). (58) Though
intent upon detecting some fault in her observance, O ruler of the earth, Indra did not find any;
he was now filled with grave anxiety as to how his welfare could be ensured in that life. (59) One
day, however, she fell asleep (even) at dusk with remnants of food still in her mouth and without
either rinsing her mouth or washing her feet, enfeebled as she was by her (austere) observance
and deluded by (an adverse) fate. (60) Finding that weak point, Indra, the master of Yoga (mystic
powers), entered by dint of (his) Yogic power the uterus of Diti, who had been robbed of her
consciousness by sleep. (61) By means of his thunderbolt he cut the embryo, brilliant as gold,
into seven. Addressing the crying embryo (as though with affection) in the words " Do not cry !"
he further cut those pieces each into seven. (62) (Even) while being rent (by Indra),O Pariksit,
they all submitted to him with joined palms, "Why do you seek to get rid of us, O Indra ? We are
Maruts (the wind-gods), your (own) half-brothers " (63) "Do not be afraid; you are (all) brothers to
me !"—so did Kaugika (Indra) reply to the (aforesaid seven) groups of the Maruts, his (future)
attendants exclusively attached to him. (64) By the grace of Lord Visnu (the Abode of Goddess
Sii, the deity presiding over beauty and prosperity), the embryo in the womb of Diti could not be
killed, though cut into numerous (forty-nine) pieces by the thunderbolt (of Indra), any more than
you (O Pariksit) were killed by the missile discharged by ASwatthama (the son of Drona). (65)
Worshipping Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person) only once, a man attains a status similar
to the Lord's; whereas (in the present case) Sri Hari was worshipped by Diti for a little less
than a year (so that the miracle that happened in the aforesaid case should cause no
wonder at all). (66) (Taken) together with Indra (their friend and leader), these Maruts
(wind-gods) came to be (known as) fifty gods. The stigma (of demonhood) attaching to
them because of their mother was wiped off and they were converted into gods (entitled
toa draught of nectar) by Indra. (67) On waking up, the worshipful Diti, who (having now
worshipped Sri Hari for close upon a year) had acquired a disposition absolutely free from
reproach, saw the babes, brilliant as fire accompanied by Indra, and felt highly gratified.
(68) Then she said to Indra, "Dear son ! desirous of obtaining a son that might prove a
source of terror to the sons of Aditi (you and your brothers), | observed this vow, which
is most difficult to undertake.(69) But, while (only) one son was coveted (by me), how did
these forty-nine babes come to be born? Tell me the truth, if known to you; but don't utter
a falsehood.” (70)

