14 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2

HOP K LY Hy ONCE RR H ACN RAAT BERRA TR PARRA ATR RRO RTA MAR LORE दा शं हो MACHT HORE MERE ME RE RE ERER AEB RRNA RAAB MAHA,

PRGA AS आजाश ERR ROAR AR ERI ARO ET EE EE EEE EE न न्नान त्तज्जजा

श्रीमद्भागवतालापात्तत्कथं बोधमेष्यति | तत्कथासु तु वेदार्थ: walsh Tor पदे पदे । ६५1
4, Ba wi ह्येनं भवन्तोऽमोघदर्शना: | विलम्बो नात्र कर्तव्य: हारणागतवत्सला: 186 |
Narada submitted : When the trio of Bhakti, Jfiana and Vairagya did not wake up (even)
when roused by means of chanting the texts from the Vedas and the Upanisads and
recitations from the Gita, how will they get up on a reading of Srimad Bhagavata; (for) in the
stories of Srimad Bhagavata,as a matter of fact, is found the substance of the Vedas (alone)
running through every couplet, nay, through every (single) word. (64-65) (Pray) resolve you
this doubt ( of mine), since your sight never goes in vain. No delay should be made by you
in this matter, fond as you are of those who have sought you for protection. (66)

PART ऊचु:
वेदोषनिषदां साराजाता भागवती कथा । अत्युत्तमा ततो भाति पृथग्भूता फलाकृति: 191
आमूलाग्रं रसस्तिष्ठन्नास्ते न wad यथा । स भूय: संपृथग्भूत: फले विश्वमनोहर: । ६८॥
यथादु।धेस्थितंसर्पिर्नस्वादायोपक्कात्ते।पृथभांहितद्बव्यंदेबलांस्सवर्धनम्।धा।
ईंश्यापिमध्य।न्तंज्ञर्कराव्यग्प्यतिष्ठत्ति।पृशाश्लाचसापिष्टातथान्धांकथा।७॰।
sumed नाम पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम् । भक्तिज्ञानविरागाणां स्थापनाय प्रकाशितम् ।७१।
वेदान्तवेदसुस्नाते गीताया अपि कर्तरि। परितापवति व्यासे मुह्यत्यज्ञानसागरे 1192 |
तदात्वयाघुराप्रौक्तंचतु:रैलोक्तामन्वितम्।तदीयश्नवणात्सद्यो निर्बाधो बादरायण: 11931
aa ते विस्मय: केन aa: प्रश्नकरो भवान्। श्रीमद्भागवतं श्राव्यं शोकदु:खविनाहानम् iow

The Kumaras replied : The story of Srimad Bhagavata has emanated from the essence
of the Vedas and the Upanisads. Having an existence apartfrom them and representing their
(very) fruit (as it were), it appears to be the very best. (67) The vital juice circulating in a tree,
for example, permeates it from its root to its very top; it cannot be tasted (in that state). The
same juice (however), when separated in (the form of ) a fruit, captivates the mind of the
whole world. (68) To take another illustration, the ghee existing (in a latent form) in milk is
not capable of being tasted (as such); but the same ghee,when separated, enhances the
delight (even) of the gods. (69) Sugar too (in the form of sap) permeates the sugar-cane from
the middle to both its ends, but tastes sweeter when separated (from the cane and
condensed ). The same is the case with the story of the Bhagavata. (70) This Purana names
"Bhagavata", which is on a par with the Vedas, has been revealed (by the sage Vedavyasa)
for stabilizing Bhakti, Jfiana and Vairagya. (71) Formerly, when (the said) Vyasa— though
well-versed in Veda and Vedanta (the Upanisads), and even though he had composed the
Gita—began to sink in the ocean of infatuation, full of remorse as he was, (this) Srimad
Bhagavata, which (originally) consisted of four couplets (only), was taught (to him) by you
on that occasion. By listening to it (the aforesaid) Vyasa was immediately rid of (all)
obstruction. (72-73) Why should there be any surprise to you at this, prompted by which you
put questions to us? Srimad Bhagavata should (accordingly) be recited to them (JfAana and
Vairagya) inasmuch as it is capable of driving away (all) grief and sorrow. (74)

ARG उवाच
aah च विनिहन्त्यशुभानि सद्य: श्रेयस्तनोति भवदु:खदवार्दितानाम्।
नि:क्लेषहोषमुखगीतकथैकपाना: प्रेमप्रकाशकृतये ङारणं गतोऽस्मि ।७५1
