436 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31

।.२.३..३.३.७..३.७.७.३.७.७..७..३.७.७..७.७.७..३..७..३.३.३.३..३.७.३.३.३.६.३..४६.८३.३३.3.0..३..७.७.३३.३.३.७.३.३.३..३ ७७१७ FHI HM HOTT ACS Hh HH FOE HH

mind had entered the most glorious Lord, addressed those rulers of men (as follows).(8)
ARG Sara
aera तानि कर्माणि तदायुस्तन्मनो वच:। नृणां ate विश्चात्मा dead हरिरीश्वर: 1 ९ ।
किं ज्ञन्मभिस्रिषिंग्र्वेह ज्ञौक्कसग्विश्याज्ञिकै:।कर्मभिर्वात्रयीप्नोक्ते: पुंसोऽपिविवुध्रावुषा|१०।
gaa तपसा वा किं वचोभिश्चित्तवृत्तिभि: | बुद्ध्या वा किं निपुणया बलेनेन्द्रियराधसा । ११।
किं वा योगेन सांख्येन न्यासस्वाध्याययोरपि if वा श्रेयोभिरन्यैश्च न यत्रात्मप्रदो हरि: 1221
श्रेयसामपि सर्वेषामात्मा ह्यवधिरर्थत: | सर्वेषामपि भूतानां हरिरात्माऽऽत्मद: प्रिय: 1231
यथा तरोर्मूलनिषेचनेन तृप्यन्ति तत्स्कन्धभुजोशाखा: |
प्राणोपहाराच्च यथेन्द्रियाणां aaa सर्वार्हणमच्युतेज्या 12% 1
ala सूर्यात्रभवन्ति an: wag तस्मिन् प्रविशन्ति काले ।
भूतानि भूमौ स्थिरजङ्घमानि तथा हरावेव गुणप्रवाह: ।१५॥
एतत्पदं aaa: wi सकृद्दिभातं सवितुर्यथा प्रभा ।
यथासवो जाग्रति सुप्तशक्तयो द्रव्यक्रियाज्ञानभिदाभ्रमात्यय: । १६॥
यथा नभस्यभ्रतम:प्रकाशा भवन्ति भूपा न भवन्त्यनुक्रमात्।
wa परे ब्रह्मणि away रजस्तम:सत्त्वमिति प्रवाह: ।१७॥

> २ LN oR . Bile . Wed ; |
स्वतेजसा ध्वस्तगुणप्रवाहमात्मैकभावेन भजध्वमद्भा । १८॥

Narada said : That birth, those actions, that period of life, that mind and that speech
alone of human beings are worth anything in this world, through which Sri Hari, the almighty
Lord and the Soul of the universe, is resorted to. (9) Of what avail to a man in this world are
the threefold birth—viz., through good parentage, through investiture with the sacred thread
and through consecration (as a preparation for the performance of a sacrifice)—duties
enjoined by the three Vedas, or even a span of life extending to the life-time of a god ? Again,
of what use is learning or asceticism or flowery speech, or the (unique) faculty of attending
to a number of things at one and the same time? Or, what benefit shall a man derive from
a penetrating intellect, strength of body or the keenness of the senses? Or what shall a man
gain by (the eight forms of) Yoga (such as Pranayama), Sankhya (the knowledge of the Spirit
as being distinct from the body etc.), Sarnnyasa (renunciation), or a study of the Vedas? And
what benefit will flow to him from other means to the attainment of salvation (such as sacred
observances and dispassion) if all these are not employed in the service of Sri Hari, who
bestows His very Self (on His devotees)? (10—12) Truly speaking, (the realization of) the
Self is the culmination of all blessings. And Sri Hari (alone ) is the beloved Self of all living
beings and itis He who enables the Jiva to realize its true character. (13) Even as the stem,
boughs and side-branches of a tree are nourished by watering its roots and just as all

the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action) are nourished
by sustaining life through food, so by offering worship to the immortal Lord all are
worshipped.(14) Even as water (in the form of rain-drops) emanates from (the rays of) the sun
during the rainy season and returns to the same source in the dry season and just as (the
physical bodies of all) mobile and immobile creatures evolve from the earth and return to the
earth, so does this animate and inanimate creation (which is product of Matter) proceeds from
SriHari and returns to Him. (15) As sunshine has no existence apart from the sun, this (material)
creation is (no other than) that (well-known) absolute (unqualified) essence of the Universal
Spirit (wherefrom it has evolved), inasmuch as it appears (like a phantom only) at times (and
remains out of sight at other times) even as the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as
