Dis. 2] BOOK EIGHT 739

RARE SH HOEK EHHR AERO AE RAKES HOH HTH Eee ee eee HAMAR ee ERA AHHR ATH .७.३.३.३ ६

राजोवाच
TRI एतत् a श्रोतुमिच्छामहे वयम्।हरिर्यथा गजपतिं ग्राहग्रस्तममूमुचत् 13 2 |
तत्कथा सुमहत् पुण्यं धन्यं स्वस्त्ययनं शुभम्। aa aaa भगवान्गीयते हरि: 1321
The king (Pariksit) submitted : O son of Badarayana ( the sage Vedavyasa, so-called
because he had his abode ina thicket of jujube trees), we long to hear from you the story as
to how Sri Hari delivered the (said) king of elephants, seized by an alligator. (31) That (alone)
of (all) stories is highly sacred, praiseworthy, conducive to blessedness and auspicious, in
which Lord Sri Hari of excellent renown is celebrated. (32)
Yd उवाच
परीक्षितॆवॆ स तु बादरायणि: प्रायोपविष्टेन कथासु चोदित: ।
sara fam: sft पार्थिवं मुदा मुनीनां सदसि स्म yuan । ३३॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायामट्टमस्कन्धे मन्वन्तरानुचरिते प्रथमोऽध्याय: 121
Sita went on : Thus urged by Pariksit, who sat determined to die (of starvation to make
amends for the indignity offered by him to a holy sage absorbed in meditation by throwing
a dead Serpent on his person), to continue his discourses (on the pastimes of the Lord), the
Sage Sukadeva (son of Badarayana,) O Brahmanas, congratulated the emperor and

joyously spoke (as follows) in that assembly of sages who were (all) listening ( with rapt
attention). (33)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of the (various)
Manvantaras, in Book Eight of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the
Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

अथ द्वितीयोऽध्याय:
Discourse Il
The lord of elephants is caught in the grip of an alligator
श्रीगुक उवाच
आसीद् fred राजंस्रिकूट इति विश्रुत: 1 क्षीरोदेनावृत: श्रीमान्योजनायुतमुच्छ्रित: । १ ।
तावता विस्तृत: पर्यक त्रिभि: शृङ्गै: पयोनिधिम् fea: खं रोचयन्नास्ते रौप्यायसहिरण्मयै: । २ ।

अन्यैश्च कुकुभ: wal रत्नधातुविचित्रितै: | पेर्निघेषि । ३ ।
स चावनिज्यमानाङ्घ्रि: समन्तात् पयऊर्मिभि: | करोति इयामलां भूमिं हरिन्मरकताइमभि: । ४ |
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वविद्याधरमहोरगै: । किन्नरैरप्सरोभिश्च क्रीडद्धिर्जुष्टकन्दर: । ५ ।
aa संगीतसन्नादैर्नददगुहममर्षया | अभिगर्जन्ति हरय: इलाघिन: परशङ्कया । ६ ।
नानत्स्वयपन्नुन्रात्तसङ्कुढ्योण्यंलङ्कृत्त: | चित्रद्गुमसुरोद्यानकलकण्ठविहङ्गम: । ७ ।
Sri Suka began again : There was a great mountain, celebrated by the name Trikuta,
(which was) encircled by the ocean of milk rich in mineral wealth and was ten thousand

Yojanas (or eighty thousand miles) high, O Pariksit | (1) Wide to the same extent (as its
height) on all sides, it stood illuminating the ocean (around), the (four) cardinal points as well -
