456 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

FRAHHHARORH EEN ELEN SOHO HEOE AEE HET HREEA EEE ERE EESER ESE EREN eH REET HEH Hee eRe eee
व्यात्र्त्त य LECH दा ee

children, kinsmen and wealth as either himself or his own. (8) When (however) the hard knot
in the shape of mind—formed in the heart of this Jiva by its Karmas (past actions)—gets
loose, then (and then alone) does it turn its back on this relation of husband and wife and,
shedding its ego (the cause of transmigration) and freed from all bondage, reaches the
Supreme. (9) By adoring Me and depending on Me, the pure Self and Preceptor (of all);
through freedom from thirst for enjoyment as well as by enduring pairs of opposites (such
as heat and cold, pleasure and pain); by realizing the fact that a living being is beset with
calamities everywhere (even in the other world); through a spirit of enquiry (into the truth of
things) through asceticism and by abstaining from actions done with some interested motive;
through actions done for My sake by hearing My stories everyday; through the fellowship of
those who look upon Me as their sole deity; by singing My praises; through even-
mindedness, tranquillity and freedom from animosity; through a desire to give up identifying
himself with the body, house etc., through a careful study of scriptures dealing with the Spirit;
by living in solitude; by thoroughly controlling the breath, the Indriyas (the senses of
perception as well as the organs of action) and the mind; through faith in saints and the holy
books; through continence, through constant vigilance (in performing one’s sacred duties);
through control of the tongue; through wisdom illumined with realization and penetrating
enough to perceive My presence everywhere; and through deep meditation, My sons, and
equipped with firmness, diligence and discretion, a clever man should (endeavour to) tear
the veil known by the name of Ego. (10—13) Remaining vigilant (all the time), he should
completely shake off by this means, as taught by his preceptor the bondage in the shape of
the knot (of egotism) in the heart, which has been brought about by ignorance and which,
again, is the storehouse where (all) the latencies of Karma lie deposited. Then he should
desist even from this endeavour. (14)

Waive शिष्यांश्च नृपो गुरुर्वां मल्लोककामो मदत्रुग्रहार्थ.'।
ya विमन्युरनुशिष्यादतज्ञान् न योजयेत्कर्मसु कर्ममूढान्।
कं योजयन्मनुजोऽर्थं लभेत निपातयन्तष्टदृशं हि गगर्ते। १५॥
vie: we श्रेयसि नष्टदृष्टिर्योऽर्थान् समीहेत निकामकाम:।
अन्योन्यवबैरर सुखलेशहेतोरनन्तदु:खं च न वेद मूढ:।१६॥
wt et सघृण: कुबुद्धिं प्रयोजयेदुत्पथगं यथान्धम्।१७॥
Tet स स्यात्स्वजनो न स ead पिता न स स्याज्जननी न सा स्यात्।
a न mem vaya स mrt मोचयेद्य: समुपेतमृत्युम्।१८।

A king or a father or a preceptor, whoever aspires to reach My abode or looks upon My
grace as the (sole) object of human pursuit, should thus instruct his ignorant subjects, sons
or pupils, andshouldin no case urge them to actions (done withan interested motive), getting
not angry with them (even if they do not listen to him and persist in doing such actions),
knowing that they erroneously regard such actions as the only way to happiness. What object
would a man gain by directing a fellow-man to such actions? For thereby he would be
throwing the blind fellow into the abyss of metempsychosis. (15) Men who crave for objects
of sensuous enjoyment alone, possessed as they are by an inordinate lust for such
enjoyment, are (really) themselves blind to their (real) well-being. That is why they enter into
enmity with one another for crumbs of pleasure and have no idea of the endless misery
(which lies in store for them as a result of such enmity), deluded as they are. (16) Seeing
such foolish men steeped in ignorance (in the form of worldly activity), no sensible and
