Dis. 32] BOOK THREE 283
SRAKH CASH HAHAHH HS Se oKeSKKAKK Awe ttre eters ene eerereegerwerebere eae ities
Sthwereera Nhe ne eeE eee Rees hie rrr re eee Re eee he iene meme ककच rein m et को

to the same goal, which is signified by the word 'Bhagavan’. (32) Just as one and the same
substance possessed of several attributes (such as colour, taste and so on) is perceived in
different ways through the senses, following different courses, even so the Lord, though one,
is variously realized through different paths recommended by the scriptures.(33) Through
works of public utility (such as the digging of wells and tanks, construction of roads etc.) and
sacrifices, charitable gifts and austere penance, study of the Vedas andan enquiry into their
meaning, nay, even through the control of the mind and senses ((ie., abstaining from
prohibited acts) as well as through the renunciation of action, through Yoga with different
limbs (such as Yama, Niyama and so on) and likewise through the discipline of Devotion,
through the twofold Dharma, viz., that which is accompanied by worldly activity and that
which is characterized by renunciation, and again through the realization of the true nature
of the Self and through dispassion do we attain to the same self-effulgent Lord, who is both
with attributes and without attributes. (34—36)

प्रावोचं भक्तियोगस्य wet ते चतुर्विधम्। कालस्य चाव्यक्तगतेर्योऽन्तर्धावति जन्तुषु 1301

जीवस्य संसृतीर्बह्वीरविद्याकर्मनिर्मिता: । यास्वङ्ग प्रविशन्नात्मा न aq गतिमात्मन: ।३८॥
नैतत्खलायोपदिशेन्नाविनीताय कर्हिचित्। न स्तब्धाय न भिन्नाय Fa धर्मध्वजाय च । ३९॥

न लोलुपायोपदिशेन्न गृहारूढचेतसे। नाभक्ताय च मे जातु न मद्भक्तद्विषामपि ।४०॥

श्रद्दधानाय भक्ताय विनीतायानसूयवे। भूतेषु कृतमेत्राय शुश्रूषाभिरताय च ।४१॥

बहिर्जातविरागाय «= fea दीयताम् । निर्मत्सराय ses wee प्रेयसां प्रिय: ।४२॥

य इदं Ye AEM पुरुष: सकृत्। यो वाभिधत्ते मच्चित्त: a ह्येति vedi च मे ।४३॥

| have already told you the fourfold character (according as it is predominated by any-
one of the three Gunas or is absolutely free from their influence) of Bhaktiyoga (the discipline
of Devotion) as well as the nature of Kala (the Time-Spirit), whose movement cannot be
perceived (through the senses) and who brings about the birth and death etc., of living
beings. (37) | have also described the various states of existence of the Jiva—brought about
by his actions prompted by Avidya (ignorance)— passing through which, O mother, the soul
forgets his true nature. (38) One should never teach this gospel of Mine to a wicked person(a
source of annoyance to others) nor to him whois wanting in modesty, nor toan arrogant man
nor again to a moral rake and in no case to a hypocrite. (39) Nor should one impart it toa
man thirsting after pleasures, nor to him whois attached to his home, nor again to him who
is not My devotee, nor to those who hate My devotees. (40) It may no doubt be imparted
to a man full of reverence, a devotee, a meek soul, an uncavilling man, one who is friendly
to living beings, and (likewise) to him who takes delight in service, one who has developed
a distaste for external objects, a man who is serene of mind, one who is free from jealousy,
one who is pure both within and without and above all to him who holds Me dearer than
all. (41-42) With his mind fixed on Me, O mother, the man who reverently listens to or repeats
this (discourse of Mine) but once will surely attain to My state.(43)

Thus ends the thirty-second discourse, forming part of the "Story of
Lord Kapila", in Book Three of the great and glorious
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as
the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

et ee
PISS Siege
