Dis. 10 ] BOOK TWO - 129

HhehaKKHN We Sreeetekhihhsowrewerweneerteesneee seehenenhrneniarennneenanAnhhAnehaane

मुखतस्तालु निर्भिन्नं जिह्वा तत्रोपजायते। adt नाना रसो जज्ञे जिह्वया योऽधिगम्यते । १८|
विवक्षोर्मुखतो भूम्नो वह्निर्वाग् sed तयो:। जले वै we aft निरोध: समजायत । १९।
नासिके निरभिद्येतां दोधूयति नभस्वति । तत्र वायुर्गन्धवह्मो घ्राणो नसि जिघृक्षत: 1201
यदाऽऽत्मनि निरालोकमात्मानं च दिदृक्षत: । AR ह्यक्षिणी तस्य ज्योतिश्चक्षुर्गुणग्रह: । २१।
बोध्यमानस्य ऋषिभिरात्मनस्तजिघृक्षत: | कर्णौ च निरभिद्येतां fet: ett गुणग्रह: 1221
वस्तुनो मृदुकाठिन्यलघुगुर्वोष्णशीतताम्। जिघृक्षतस्त्वङ् निर्भिन्ना तस्यां रोममहीरुहा: |
तत्र चान्तर्बहिर्वातस्त्वचा लब्धगुणो Fa: । २३ ।

wt रुरुहतुस्तस्य नाना कर्मचिकीर्षया । तयोस्तु बलमिन्द्रश्च आदानमुभयाश्रयम् । २४॥
गतिं जिगीषत: पादौ रुरुहातेऽभिकामिकाम्। पद्भ्यां यज्ञ: स्वयं हव्यं कर्मभि: क्रियते नृभि: । २५॥
निरभिद्यत fret a प्रजानन्दामृतार्थिन: | उपस्थ आसीत् कामानां प्रियं तदुभयाश्रयम् । २६॥
उत्सिसृक्षोर्धातुमलं निरभिद्यत वै गुदम्।ततत: पायुस्ततो मित्र set उभयाश्रय: 1201
आसिसृप्सो: पुर: पुर्या नाभिद्वारमपानत: । तत्रापानस्ततो मृत्यु: पृथक्त्वमुभयाश्रयम् । २८|
आदित्सोरन्नपानानामासन् कुक्ष्यन्त्रनाडय: । नद्य: समुद्राश्च तयोस्तुष्टि: पुष्टिस्तदाश्रये । २९।
निदिध्यासोरात्ममायां हृदयं निरभिद्यत । ततो मनस्ततश्चन्द्र: सङ्कल्प: काम Wa T1301
त्वक्चर्ममांसरुधिरमेदोमजास्थिधातव: । भूम्यप्तेजोमया: सप्त प्राणो व्योमाम्बुवायुभि: । ३१।
गुणात्मकानीन्द्रियाणि भूतादिप्रभवा गुणा:। मन: सर्वविकारात्मा बुद्धिर्विज्ञानरूपिणी 1३२॥
एतद्भगवतो रूपं we ते व्याहतं var मह्यादिभिश्चावरणैरष्टभिर्बहिरावृतम् 1331
अत: परं सूक्ष्मतममव्यक्तं निर्विशोषणम्। अनादिमध्यनिधनं नित्यं वाङ्मनस: परम् । ३४॥

When the Cosmic Being bestirred Himself, there arose from the space within His body
the acuteness of the senses, strength of will and strength of body as well. And from these
sprang up Prana, the chief of all the vital airs. (15) Just as the attendants ofa king follow him,
even so the senses in all living beings are active when this Prana is active but cease to be
active the moment this Prana becomes inactive. (16) With the free movement of the Prana
the Cosmic Being was overcome with hunger and thirst; and the moment He felt inclined to
eat and drink a mouth appeared in Him in the first instance. (17) From the mouth came out
the palate, in which the sense of taste was produced; and thence were evolved the different
kinds of tastes, which are experienced by the sense of taste (as well as the deity presiding
over the same). (18) When the Cosmic Being felt inclined to speak, there emanated from His
mouth the god of fire (the deity presiding over the organ of speech), the organ of speech itself
and the act of speaking, which depends both on the organ of speech and the deity presiding
over the same. Till then the Cosmic Being remained under water controlling His breath for
a pretty long time. (19) When, however, His breath sought an outlet and pressed forward,
a pair of nostrils appeared in Him. And as He felt inclined to perceive smell, there appeared
in His nose the olfactory sense as well as the wind-god (the deity presiding over the sense
of smell), the bearer of smell. (20) When there was darkness all about Himand He felt inclined
to see Himself and other things, there appeared in Him a pair of eyes, the sun-god (the deity
presiding over the sense of sight) and the sense of sight; and thence followed the perception
of colour (the object of sight). (21) On the Vedas proceeding to awaken Him (through hymns
of praise addressed to Him) and on the Cosmic Being feeling inclined to hear them, there
appeared in Him a pair of ears, the Digdevatas (the deities presiding over the four quarters
