442 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1

PECHHHEE ERA EER ESE EARLE SHED ज SETS LEAH LET EE HEE EOE EEE THANE HE ETH SEETHER POH

is the seat of a lotus, you have thoroughly conquered the six enemies. (Therefore, first) enjoy
on this earth the blessings bestowed (on you) by that Supreme Person and (then), wholly
freed from attachment, be established in the Self. (19)

AYA उवाच
सबहुमानमुवाह।२०॥। भगवानपि मनुना चथावदुपकल्पितापचिति: प्रियव्रतनारदयोरविषम-

Sri Suka continued : Thus instructed, Priyavrata (that eminent devotee of the Lord)
most respectfully accepted the command of the glorious Brahma (the preceptor of the three
worlds) with the words "Very well !," his head bent low as a token of his smallness
(humility).(20) The glorious Brahma too, who was duly honoured by Manu, left for his abode
(the Brahmaloka), contemplating on his own asylum (the supreme Brahma)—whois beyond
the ken of speech and mind and is incapable of being dealt with—while Priyavrata and
Narada kept gazing on him with a serene look. (21)

मनुरपि परेणैवं प्रतिसन्धितमनोरध: सुरर्षिवरानुमतेनात्मजमखिलधरामण्डलस्थितिगुप्तय आस्थाप्य
स्वयमतिविषमविषयविषजलाशयाशाया उपरराम।२२। इति ह aa स जगतीपतिरीश्वरेच्छयाधि-

निवेशितकर्माधिकारोऽखिलजगद्वन्धध्वंसनपरानुभाव्स्य भगवत आदिपस्त्यस्यज्ञीवुपलानबरतध्यानानुभावेन
परिंरन्धितकषत्थाशयोंण्यदातोऽपिमानवर्धंनोमहतामह्रीतलग्मनुशशम्स। २३ ।अथचद्दुन्तिरप्रजाफ्तेविश्बकर्मण

`कृतपरिचया: पारमहंस्यमेवाश्रममभजन्। २६ ।तस्मिन्नु ह वा उपशमशीला: परमर्षय: सकलजीवनिकायावासस्य
भगवतो age भीतानां शरणभूतस्य श्रीमच्चरणारविन्दाविरतस्मरणाविगलितपरमभक्तियोगानुभावेन
`परिभावितान्तर्हृदयाधिगते भगवति सर्वेषां भूतानामात्मभूते प्रत्यगात्मन्येवात्मनस्तादात्म्यमविशेषेण समीयु: । २७ |
अन्यस्यामपि जायायां त्रय: पुत्रा आसन्नुत्तमस्तामसो Lae इति मन्वन्तराधिपतय: । २८ ।

Manu too, whose ambition (of bequeathing the kingship to his son and retiring to the
woods for meditation and worship) was thus fulfilled by Brahma (the highest of the gods),
appointed Priyavrata (his son) with the concurrence of Narada (the foremost of celestial
sages) to maintain stability of rule on the terrestrial globe and himself gave up the desire of
enjoying home life, which is like a most fearful lake full of poisonous water in the shape of
sensuous pleasures. (22) Thus appointed by God's will to do work, the emperor (Priyavrata),
whose impurities of mind had been burnt, nay, who had become (extremely) pure by virtue
of constant meditation on the feet of the Lord, the most ancient Person—whose supreme
glory is capable of destroying the bondage of the entire creation—ruled over the earth just
in order to show his great regard for the exalted (by obeying their command). (23) He then
married a daughter, named Barhismati, of Viswakarma (the architect of the gods), a lord of
created beings; and how wondertul that through her he actually begot ten sons—who were
evidently as great as he in amiability, virtues, actions, comeliness of form and prowess—as
well as a daughter, Urjaswati by name, who was younger than all of them. (24) They all bore
the names of the fire-god, viz., Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajiabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyareta
Ghrtaprstha, Savana, MedhAtithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. (25) Three of these—Kavi, Mahavira
and Savana were lifelong celibates; they took toa study of the science of Self-Knowledge from
their very infancy and (eventually) entered the order of recluses. (26) Continuing in that ASrama
