586 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

PORK AERA HOOKAH RAE OHTA EH HEE ESHER EH EERE EE EAH EEE ७३३६ RW H AH EHH eee He

being accomplished in this household life by me with the aforesaid means, how shall | take,
O suzerain lords, to the reproachable vocation of a priest, with which a fool alone remains
pleased. (36) Yet | dare not decline what is earnestly asked for by you (my elders), which
is of no account. (On the other hand,) | shall (presently) accomplish all that you have
solicited, even at the sacrifice of my life and my (highest) interests. (37)
A

तेभ्य एवं प्रतिश्रुत्य विश्वरूपो महातपा: । पोरोहित्यं gage परमेण समाधिना ।३८॥

atest fre गुप्तामोशानस्यापि विद्यया । आच्छिद्यादान्महेन्द्राय denen विद्यया fay: । ३९॥

यया गुप्त: सहस्राक्षो जिग्येऽसुरचमूर्विभु: । तां प्राह स महेन्द्राय विश्वरूप उदारधी: ।`४०॥

Sri Suka resumed : Having thus promised them (the gods), Viswartipa, (who was) a
great ascetic, discharged, as requested, the role of a priest with supreme diligence. (38)
Vi$wartipa (who wielded extraordinary power by virtue of the Lord's grace) snatched, by
means of a prayer addressed to Lord Visnu (in the form of what is known as the Narayana-
Kavaca and stands incorporated in Discourse viii below), the fortune of the Asuras (the
enemies of the gods)—though protected by means of the prayer taught by Usana
(Sukracarya)—and restored it to the great Indra (the lord of paradise). (39) The said
Viswartpa, noble-mindedas he was, taught tothe greatIndra the above-mentioned prayer,
protected by which that mighty god with a thousand eyes was able to conquer the demon
hosts. (40)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, in Book Six of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

उ Pa RT,
IIE Siege

अथाष्टमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VIll
The text of the (holy) Narayana-Kavaca (a prayer invoking the
protection of Lord Narayana) taught (to Indra)
राजोवाच

यया गुप्त: सहस्राक्ष: सवाहान् रिपुसैनिकान्। क्रीडन्निव विनिर्जित्य त्रिलोक्या बुभुजे श्रियम् । १ ।
भगवंस्तन्ममाख्याहि वर्म नारायणात्मकम्।यथाऽऽततायिन शत्रून् येन गुप्तोऽजयन्मृधे । २ ।

The king (Pariksit) submitted ; O divine sage, teach me that prayer (serving as a
protective armour against all evils &nd) invoking the succour of Lord Narayana (hence
spoken of as identical with Him, there being perfect identity between God and the means
of realizing Him), protected by which Indra (who is endowed with a thousand eyes)
thoroughly and entirely subdued as though in sport the enemy's troops along with their
mounts and enjoyed the fortune of all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate
region); and (further) tell me how, protected by that armour, he was able to conquer the
enemies who came to take his life on the field of battle. (1-2)
