Dis. 26] BOOK TEN 215

ROAR eS Se Et ee ey ee eee ees ESO eos Ret Br SR ee
अथ षड्विंशोऽध्याय:
Discourse XXVI
Nanda's conversation with the cowherds about Sri Krsna's glory
॥ BTR उवाच
एवंविधानि कर्माणि गोपा: कृष्णस्य वीक्ष्य ते । अतद्वीर्यविद: stg: समभ्येत्य सुविस्मिता: । १ ।
बालकस्य यदेतानि antag aimee जन्म ग्राम्येषात्मजुगुप्सितम् । २ |

a: सप्तहायनो ae: करेणैकेन लीलया । कथं fave गिरिवरं gent गजराडिव । ३ |
तोकेनामीलिताक्षेण पूतनाया महौजस: । पीत: स्तन: सह NTT: कालेनेव वयस्तनो: । ४ ।
हिन्वतोऽध: ज्यानस्य मास्यस्य चरणावुदक् । अनोऽपतद् विपर्यस्तं रुद्त: प्रपदाहतम्। ५ I
एकहायन आसीनो ह्रियमाणो विहायसा । दैत्येन यस्तृणावर्तमहन् कण्ठग्रहातुरम् । ६ ।
क्वचिद्धैयङ्गवस्तैन्ये मात्रा ag उलूखले । गच्छन्नर्जुनयोर्मध्ये बाहुभ्यां तावपातयत्। ७ |
वने सञ्जारयन् वत्सान् सरामो बालकैर्वृत: | हन्तुकामं 1 वकं sal मुखतोऽरिमपाटयत् । ८ 1
aay वत्सरूपेण ose जिघांसया । हत्वा न्यपातयत्तेन कपित्थानि च लीलया । ९ |
हत्वा रासभदॆतेयॆ तद्वन्धूंश्च बलान्वित: । चक्रे तालवनं क्षेमं परिपक्वफलान्वितम् ॥१०॥
see घातयित्वोग्रं बलेन वलजशालिना। अमोचयद sag गोपांश्चारण्यवह्नित: ।११।
arias दमित्वा विमदं ger! प्रसह्योद्वास्य यमुनां चक्रेऽसौ निर्विषोदकाम् 1221
दुस्यजश्चानुरागोऽस्मिन् सर्वेषां नो व्रजौकसाम् । नन्द ते तनयेऽस्मासु तस्याप्योत्पत्तिक: कथम् 123 1
’क्व॰सप्तहायनो aie: & महाद्रिविधारणम् । ततो नो जायते TET व्रजनाथ तवात्मजे ।१४॥
Sri Suka began again ; Much astonished to witness such (superhuman) feats of Sri
Krsna, the aforesaid Gopas, who were ignorant of His power, gathered together and talked
(as follows):—(1) Since these exploits are most wonderful indeed on the part of a (mere) boy,
how could he deserve a birth among rustics, which is (so) unworthy of himself ? (2) A boy
of seven, how could he keep on holding (for a week ) with one hand a big mountain as
sportfully as a lordly elephant would hold a lotus ? (3) By him as a (mere) babe with its eyes
half closed was sucked the breast of the mighty Ptana alongwith her life, (even) as the life-
span ofa living organism is (gradually) swallowed up by Time ! (4) Struck by the fore part of
his feet (even) as he—(only three) months old—lay underneath a cart kicking up his feet and
crying, the cart fell topsy-turvy ! (5) Being carried away through the sky by a demon while
squatting (on the floor) as an infant of one year, he killed the demon, Trnavarta (by name),
who was feeling oppressed on account of his being caught by the neck ! (6) Tied by the
mother to a mortar on the ground of theft of butter, on one occasion, and crawling on all fours
between the two Arjuna trees he caused them to fall down ! (7) Duly pasturing calves in the
forest. accompanied by Balarama and surrounded by (other) boys, he tore asunder by the
bill, with his arms, his enemy in the form of a heron, that sought to kill him. (8) Having killed
another demon,who, in the guise of a calf had found his way into his herd of calves with intent
tokill him, he sportfully caused with the carcass a number of Kapittha trees to fall (by dashing
itagainst the Kapittha trees) ! (9) Slaying the demon (Dhenuka), disguised as a donkey, and
his kinsfolk while accompanied by Balarama, he rendered safe the forest of palm trees (the
home of Dhenuka); which was rich with ripe fruits. (10) Getting the terrible (demon) Pralamba
