Dis. 33 ] BOOK TEN 239

ee ee ee eee ee eR ee dd

inasmuch as 1) do not (visibly) reciprocate the love (and remain out of sight for some time)
of even those individuals who love Me, in order that they could ever think of Me in the same
way as a penniless person would, on a treasure found by him being lost, remain engrossed
in the thought of that wealth (alone) and would not be sensible to anything else. (20) Indeed
in order to ensure thus your constant devotion to Me, O fair ones, | remained out of your sight
(for some time), though loving you invisibly (and listening to your professions of love with
great delight)—you, who have for My sake ignored (all worldly decorum as well as (the
injunctions of) the Vedas and deserted your own people. Therefore, O beloved ones, you
ought not to find fault with Me, your darling. (21) (As a matter of fact) | cannot even through
the (long) life of a heavenly being (36000 human years) repay My obligation (whichis the duty
of all virtuous men) to you, whose connection with Me is (absolutely) free from blemish and
who have fixed your mind on Me completely cutting asunder the fetters that bound you to your
home and which cannot be easily broken. (Therefore,) let your services to Me be repaid by
your own goodness. (22)

Thus ends the thirty-second discourse entitled "The Lord comforts the Gopis during the Rasa-
Play” in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Socata:
re SS irre

अथ त्रयस्रिंशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XXXIll
A Description of the Rasa Play

sa भगवतो गोष्य: Aen वाच: सुपेशला: see तापं तदङ्खोपचिताशिष: । १ ।

Sri Suka began again : Hearing thus the bewitching words of the Lord, the cowherd
women cast off the agony caused by their separation (from Him), their desire having been
fulfilled through the (thrilling) touch of His divine personality (the embodiment of Bliss). (1)
Accompanied by those jewels among women (so) devoted and affectionate towards Him,
who stood (in a circle) with their arms interlocked, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows)
inaugurated His (celebrated) Rasa-Play* on the aforesaid spot (the sandy bank of the
Yamuna). (2)

प्रविष्टेन गृहीतानां कण्ठे स्वनिकटं स्रिय: । ३ ।

* In the Natya-Sastra (the well-known manual on histrionics attributed to the sage Bharata) we come across the following
definition of Rasa:—

नटैरगृहातकण्ठानामन्योत्यात्तकरश्रिवाम्। नर्तकीनां भवेद् रासो मण्डलीभूय नर्तनम्॥
* Rasa is the name ofa particular dance carried on by a number of women dancing ina circle with their hands interlocked
in the company of men who dance with them with their arms placed round the neck of their female partners.
