Dis. 29] “BOOK FOUR -. 423 .

ERAT ISON RO Rat SORE TOR SOR ft 08 RO Ft RE TN SOR ORE ERROR WHT ROR ri
SSS ees

nature) the Jiva is a (mere) witness. (17)

ae रथस्तिन्द्रियाश्च संवत्सररयोऽगति: । द्विकर्मचक्रस्रिगुणध्वज: पञ्चासुबन्धुर: ।१८॥

मनोरश्मिर्बुद्धिसूतो हृन्नीडो द्इन्द्वकूबर: | पञ्चेन्दियार्थप्रक्षेप: सप्तधातुवस्तथक: 188 |

आकूतिर्विक्रमो art मृगतृष्णां प्रधावति । एकादशोन्द्रियचमू: पञ्चसूनाविनोदकृत् 1201

The body is the chariot having the senses of perception for its horses and coursing swiftly
(on the face of it) like the year, though (really) motionless. The two varieties of Karma (good
and evil actions) are its two wheels; the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) are its three
flagstaffs and the five vital airs (Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana) are its five
cords.(18) The mind is its (single) rein; the intellect, the charioteer; the heart, the seat (for
the occupant of the chariot); the pairs of opposites ( just as joy and sorrow, honour and
ignominy and so on), the poles (to which the yoke is fixed); the objects of the five senses,
the recesses (into which the weapons are deposited); the seven constituent elements (viz.,
chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen) make the seven protective sheaths; and
the five organs of action (the tongue, the hands and feet and the organs of copulation and
defecation) are its five kinds of outward motion. (In this way) the Jiva runs after the mirage
(of sense-gratification), followed by the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the
five organs of action) and the mind (the inner sense) as his army and unlawfully enjoying the
five forms of sensuous pleasure, which have been figuratively spoken of as the slaughtering
of animals. (19-20)
हरन्त्यायु: परिक्रान्त्या षष्ट्युत्तरशतत्रयम् 122 1
कालकन्या जरा साक्षाल्लोकस्तां नाभिनन्दति । स्वसारं जगृहे मृत्यु: क्षयाय ada: 1221
आधयो व्याधयस्तस्य सैनिका यवनाश्चरा: । भूतोपसर्गाशुरय: प्रज्वारो द्विविधो ज्वर: 1231
The year, which symbolizes the (passage of) time, is (referred to under the name of)

Candavega (the chief of the Gandharvas); the days and nights (comprising the year) have
been spoken of as the three hundred and sixty male and the same number of female
Gancharvas, forming his retinue, who steal the life (of a human being) by rotation. (21) Old
age is personified as the daughter of Kala (Time), whom the world does not welcome. Death
inthe person of the Yavana chief (Bhaya) accepted her as a sister for (help in) the destruction
of the world. (22) Mental anguishes and physical disorders are the Yavanas, the mobilized
troops (of the Yavana chief). And the fever of two kinds” is (personified as) Prajwara (the
brother of the Yavana chief) who is described as having a swift career in tormenting living
beings. (23) ।। = ॥ —_

wa बहुविधैर्दु:खैर्दैवभूतात्मसम्भवे: । fa: wa वर्षं देहे देही तमोवृत: । २४।

प्राणेन्द्रियमनोधर्मानात्मन्यध्यस्य निर्गुण: । शेते कामलवान्ध्यायन्ममाहमिति कर्मकृत् । २५॥

यदाऽऽत्मानमविज्ञाय Wed परं गुरुम्। पुरुषस्तु विषज्जेत गुणेषु wed: स्वदृक् । २६

गुणाभिमानी स तदा कर्माणि कुरुतेऽवश: । Tse कृष्णं लोहितं वा यथाकर्माभिजायते 1291

शुक्कात्प्रकाशभूयिष्ठांल्लोकानाप्नोति  कर्हिचित् । दु:खोदर्कान्क्रियायासांस्तम: शोकोत्कटान्क्वचित् ।२८॥

क्वचित्पुमान् क्वचिच्च स्री क्वचिन्नोभयमन्धधी: । देवो मनुष्यस्तिर्यग्वा यथाकर्मगुणं भव: ।२९॥

क्षुतप्रीतो यथा दीन: सारमेयो गृहं गृहम्। चरन् विन्दति यद्दिष्टं दण्डमोदनमेव वा ।३०॥

aM wma जीव उच्चावचपथा भ्रमन्। उपर्यधो वा मध्ये वा याति दिष्टं प्रियाप्रियम् । ३१

* Sitajwara (fever accompanied with fits of cold) and Dahajwara (inflammatory fever) are the two types of fever obviously
referred to here.
