498 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 87

OE OT CONE OE OR ककक ७ EE प्त SE OCR E SCHEER ES CCK OE सा शाक त्वा UMN वा STONE MENSA

ARG उवाच

नमस्तस्मै भगवते कृष्णायामलकीर्त्तये। यो धत्ते सर्वभूतानामभवायोङाती: कला: ।४६॥

Narada prayed : Hail to the celebrated Lord Sri Krsna of stainless glory (in You), who
assumes charming forms for putting an end to the (repeated) birth of all created beings. (46)

इत्याद्यमृषिमानम्य तच्छिष्यांश्च महात्मन:। ततोऽगादाश्रमं साक्षात् पितुर्दैपायनस्य Five!
सभाजितो भगवता कृतासनपरिग्रह: । तस्मै aa वर्णयामास नारायणमुखाच्छुतम् ।४८॥
इत्येतद् वर्णितं राजन् aa: प्रश्न:, कृतस्त्वया । यथा ब्रह्मण्यनिर्देश्ये निर्गुणेऽपि मनश्चरेत् xe!
योऽस्योत्प्रेक्षक आदिमध्यनिधने योऽव्यक्तजीवेश्वरो
a: सृद्टेदमनुप्रविरय ऋॠषिणा चक्रे पुर: शास्ति ता: ।
यं We जहात्यजामनुशयो सुप्त: कुलायं यथा
तं कैवल्यनिरस्तयोनिमभयं ध्यायेदजस्रं Fare । ५०॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां दशमस्कन्धे उत्तरार्धे नारदनारायणसंवादॆ
वेदस्तुतिर्नाम सप्ताश्चीतितमोऽध्याय: 1291
Bowing low in this way to the Sage Narayana (the most ancient seer) as well as to His
high-souled disciples, Narada proceeded from that piace to the hermitage of my father, the
sage Dwaipayana, (who was) directly present there (at that time). (47) Welcomed by the
divine sage (Vyasa) and having taken his seat, Narada reproduced to him the aforesaid
hymn (chanted by the Vedas in living form) as heard from the lips of the sage Narayana. (48)
In this way has this hymn (sung by the Vedas) been reproduced by me, O Pariksit, describing
how the mind (as well as the Veda) could penetrate Brahma even though the latter was
indefinable and untouched by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), which (precisely) was the
question that had been put to us by you. (49) One should constantly meditate on Sri Hari.
the Dispeller of (all) fears, who in His absolute state keeps Maya (the prime cause) at a
distance; who plans this universe and continues at the beginning, middle and end of it, who
is the Ruler of both the Unmanifest (Prakrti) and the Jiva (embodied soul); who, having
created this universe and entered it forthwith alongwith the Jiva, evolves bodiés (for the
Jivas) and controls (maintains) them; and having attained to whom the Jiva sheds ignorance
(that has no beginning) in the same way as a man fast asleep loses consciousness of his
body. (50)

Thus ends the eighty-seventh discourse intitled " A Song of Praise uttered by the Vedas
(in their living form)," forming the theme of a dialogue between Narada and
the divine Sage Narayana, in the latter half of Book Ten of the
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhila.

उत्तर्त्त
त्ज्जसा
