Dis. 53] BOOK TEN 337

See OIE Ee PE EE PETE TELE T EE ELE POTEET TH EMEA

fig, tam, ware विप्रांश्च विधिवन्नृप । भोजयित्वा यथान्यायं वाचयामास मङ्गलम् । १०1

॥ = । ३ —_ म 7 fei wean

चक्रु: सामर्ग्यजुर्मन्रैर्वध्वा wat द्विजोत्तमा: । पुरोहितोऽथर्वविद् 3 जुहाव ग्रहञ्ञान्तये ।१२॥

हिरण्यरूप्यवासांसि तिलांश्च गुडमिथ्रितान्। were sag विप्रेभ्यो राजा विधिविदां वर: 1931
Following the wishes of his son (Rukmi) out of affection (for him) and intending to give
away his girl (Rukmini) to Sisupala (against his own will), the aforesaid king Bhismaka (the
ruler of Kundinapura) had (the necessary) rites (preliminary to the wedding) performed (in
due course). (7) The city—whose roads, streets and crossings were cleanly swept andamply
sprinkled with water and which was crowded with men and women decked with sandal-
paste, garlands and (other) ornaments of flowers, clad in spotless white and adorned with
jewels, and was full of splendid mansions perfumed with incense of aloe—was tastefully
decorated with flags of various designs and colours as well as with omamental arches. (8-9)
Having duly worshipped the manes and gods in accordance with the scriptural ordinance,
O protector of men, an fed Brahmanas and others each in his rightful place, the king caused
benedictory verses to be recited (by Brahmanas for the welfare of his daughter). (10) He
(also) caused his daughter of charming teeth to be duly washed and adorned with an
auspicious thread with a small piece of gold fastened toitin the middle and (further) decked
with a brand-new pair of silken pieces and excellent oraments. (11) The foremost among
the Brahmanas ensured the safety of the bride (against evil spirits and an evil eye) by reciting
sacred texts from the Samaveda, Rgveda and Yajurveda; while the family priest, (who was)
well-versed in Atharva-Veda, poured oblations into the sacred fire for the propitiation of
(unpropitious) planets. (12) The king—who was foremost among those conversant with
scriptural ordinances—gave away to Brahmanas gold, silver and textiles as well as

sesamum seeds mixed with jaggery and cows (too). (13)

एवं चेदिपती राजा दमघोष: सुताय वै। कारयामास we: सर्वमभ्युदयोचितम् । १४॥

तं वै विदर्भाधिपति: समभ्येत्याभिपूज्य ai निवेशयामास मुदा कल्पितान्यनिवेशाने 1१६॥

त्त्र Seal जरासन्धो दन्तवक्त्रो विदूरथ: । आजग्मुश्चैद्यपक्षीया: पौण्ड्रकाद्या: सहस्रहा: 1201

कृष्णरामद्विषो यत्ता: कन्यां चैद्याय साधितुम्। यद्यागत्य हरेत् कृष्णो रामाद्यैर्यदुभिर्वृत: । १८॥

dram: संहतास्तेन ga निश्चितमानसा: । aera: सर्वे समग्रबलवाहना: ।१९॥
Likewise King Damaghosa, the ruler of Cedi, too caused all that was worth undertaking
on festive occasions to be performed in the interests of his son (Sisupala) by Brahmanas
well-versed in sacred texts. (14) Surrounded by hosts of elephants discharging temporal
fluid, war-chariots hung with gold necklaces and troops teeming with foot-soldiers and
cavalry, Damaghosa marched to Kundinapura. (15) Going forth with due ceremony to meet
him and honouring him in everyway, Bhismaka (the suzerain lord of Vidarbha) gladly
lodged him in another mansion specially constructed (for the bridegroom and his party).
(16) Salva, Jarasandha, Dantavaktra, Vidiratha, Paundraka and other kings, belonging
to the party of Sigupala and inimical to Sri Krsna and Balarama, (also) appeared there
(in the city of Kundinapura) in thousands, bent on securing the bride for Sisupala (the
ruler of Cedi). Having made up their mind that they would jointly contend with Sri Krsna
in case He should go there accompanied by Balarama and other Yadus and (endeavour
to) take away the bride, the (aforesaid) kings had all arrived there with their entire host

