यद्रोषविभ्रग्मबिबृत्तक्याक्षपातर्सभ्रान्तनक्रपक्ता भयगीर्णघोष: ।
fay: झिरस्यर्हणं परिगृह्य रूपी पादारविन्दमुपगम्य बभाष एतत् 1१३॥
न त्वां aa जडधियो नु विदाम भूमन् कूटस्थमादिपुरुषं जगतामधीहाम् ।
यत्सत्त्वत: सुरगणा रजस: प्रजेशा मन्योश्च भूतपतय: स भवान् गुणेश: ।१४॥
कामं प्रयाहि wie विश्रवसोऽवमेहं त्रैलोक्यरावणमवाप्नुहि वीर पत्नीम् ।
'बध्नीहिस्रेतुपिइतेयक्तोवितस्यैगप्यल्लिंदिग्विजयिनोययुपेत्यथूपा:।१५।
a बैरनीकैर्लङा विभी दि क
सा वानरेन्द्रबलरुद्धविहारकोष्ठश्रीद्वारगोपुरसदोवलभीविटङ्का |
निर्भज्यमानधिषणध्वजहेमकुम्भशृङ्गाटका गजकुलैर्हृदिनीव घूर्णा 1s
रक्ष:पतिस्तदवलोक्य निकुम्भकुम्भधूम्राक्षदुर्मुखसुरान्तनरान्तकादीन् |
Wi प्रहस्तमतिकायविकम्पनादीन् सर्वानुगान् समहिनोदथ कुम्भकर्णम् ।१८॥
at चातुधानपृतनामसिशूलचापप्रासष्टिशक्तिशरतोमरखड्गदुर्गाम् ।
सुग्रीवलक्ष्मणमरुत्सुतगन्घमादनीलाङ्गदर्क्षषनसादिभिरन्वितोऽगात् 1१९॥
तेऽनीकपा रघुपतेरभिपत्य wi ge वसूथमिभपत्तिरथाश्वयोधै: |

जघ्नुर्हुमैर्गिरिगदेषुभिरङ्गदाद्या: सीताभिमर्छहतमङ्गलरावणेशान् ।२०॥

(Earlier) in the course of a sacrificial performance of the sage Viswamitra, Marica and
other demon chiefs, who roamed about (and carried on their nefarious activities) at night,
were beaten by Him (all alone), Laksmana standing (aloof) as a mere spectator. (5) Picking
up in the midst of an assembly of world-renowned heroes the formidable bow of Lord Siva,
lying in a hall (specially) built for the choice-marriage of Princess Sita and brought (conjointly)
by three hundred men, He strung it and, (then) drawing it, broke it in the middle, 0 protector
of men, as sportfully as an immature elephant would snap a stick of sugar-cane! (6) Having
won (as the prize for his feat of valour). Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) whose
virtues, disposition, age, limbs and appearance (eminently) matched His, (nay,) who (in the
form of a golden streak) had (already) secured an honourable place on His bosom and who
(now) bore the name of Sita—He tamed, while on His way (back ot Ayodhya) the overgrown
pride of Parasurama (the chief of the Bhrgus), who had thrice seven times swept the earth
clean (even) of the seed of the Ksatriya race. (7) The Lord accepted with His head bent low
the command of even His uxorious father (King Dagaratha), who was bound by the cords
of truthfulness, and, relinquishing (His claim to) the throne, (of Ayodhya), the (imperial)
fortune, His loving relations (mother and so on), friends and dwelling-place—even as an
ascetic (who has shaken off ali attachment) would give up the ghost, left for the woods along-
with His (divine) Spouse (Sita). (8) (While in the forest) He mutilated the features of
Surpanakha (the sister of the demon king) a woman of unclean mind, slew her kinsmen,
numbering (not less than) fourteen thousand, Khara, Dusana and Trigira being the foremost
(of them), and roaming about with an irresistible bow in His hand, led a hard life (in order to
teach alesson to humanity). (9) Observing the demon Marica deputed in the form of a weird
(golden) deer, O protector of men, by Ravana (the ten-headed monster)}—whose passion
had been kindled on hearing a description of Sita (from the lips of Surpanakha)—and drawn
away from His hermitage (by the aforesaid deer), He forthwith killed Marica with an arrow

