612 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

BIRLA H SRA HELE TREASON की व्ये EES SHEE वी कज् EAE HEEHESSE GH ट्यन्र HEELS EHREEER HES E RHE ee
तावत्रिणाकॆ ARE: शशास विद्यातपोयोगबलानुभाव: |
स सम्पदैश्चर्यमदान्धबुद्धिर्नीतस्तिरश्चां गतिमिन्द्रपत्न्या 125 |
ततो गतो ब्रह्मगिरोपहूत ऋतम्भरध्याननिवारिताघ: ।
पापस्तु दिग्देवतया हतौजास्ते नाभ्यभूदवितं विष्णुपत्या ।१७॥

Sri Suka went on : Thus urged by the Brahmanaas, Indra killed Vrtra (his enemy). On
his being (thus) slain, the sin of having killed a Brahmana came upon Indra. (10) Due to
(the consciousness of) that sin Indra suffered (untold) agony and no peace of mind
returned to him (even for a moment ). Even (fortitude and other) virtues fail to bring relief
to him who, while endowed with a sense of shame, has incurred obloquy. (11) He saw the
aforesaid sin running after him in human form, resembling that of a pariah woman suffering
from consumption, clad in blood-stained clothes, her limbs trembling due to old age, and
throwing about her grey hair, crying "Stop ! Stop !!" and befouling (the air of) the road with
her breaths stinking like (rotten) fish. (12-13) Indra (who is possessed of a thousand eyes
located all over his body), O Pariksit (a ruler of the people), ranged through the sky and
(then) in all directions and, (finally) betaking himself to the north-east, Oking, quickly entered
the Manasa lake. (14) Pondering within (himself) the means of absolution from the sin of
having slain a Brahmana and getting no subsistence, because he remained under water
and had the god of fire (who could not obviously enter water* ) for his purveyor (agency
conveying sacrificial offerings) , Indra lived unperceived (by Brahmahatya) in the fibres of
a lotus-stalk (in the Manasa lake) for a thousand years. (15) Till then (the famous king)
Nahusa (of the mortal world)—who had acquired the capacity to rule over Swarga by virtue
of (his) worship, asceticism and mystical powers—ruled over (acted as the regent of) the
third heavent (the celestial region). His intellect (however) having been blinded through
arrogance caused by opulence and power, he was cast (through an ingenious devices) into
a sub-human species (the serpent race) by Saci (the virtuous spouse of Indra, whom he
claimed as his wife). (16) Called by the invocation of the Brahmanas (sages), Indra—whose
sin had (in the meantime) been neutralized through meditation on Sri Hari (the Upholder of

* Afamous commentator of Srimad Bhagavata, however, points out that the god of fire does enter water when carrying
oblations to Varuna ( the god of water residing in water), so that it was not impossible for him to enter the Manasa lake and
purvey food to Indra. The Manasa lake, however being closely guarded by the attendants of Sri Rudra, he could not easily
enter it without disclosing the secret of Indra's hiding there.

+ Swarga (Indra's paradise) is called the third heaven inasmuch asitls the third in order of the seven upper spheres
of the universe from the earth onwards, the terrestrial sphere (which has also been declared to be a place of enjoyment
of the fruit of one’s merits, with the exception of Bharatavarsa, which is pre-eminently a place for action—Karmabhtmi—
vide V. xvii. Il).

+ Having ascended the throne of Indra, Nahusa—who was attracted by the extraordinary charms of the former's spouse,
Saci, claimed her as his legitimate wife and Invited her accordingly to live with him. Saci, who was the wedded wife of Indra
and was, therefore, exclusively devoted to him, naturally disdained his invitation and sought the advice of the sage Brhaspati
(Indra's preceptor and family priest, who had since returned and resumed his office) how to elude the grasp of Nahusa, whom
she could not openly defy because of her forlom condition. The sagacious Brhaspati, who naturally sympathized with the
virtuous lady advised her that she should offer to meet Nahusa provided he should visit her in a palanquin bome by Brahmana
sages. Nahusa, who was blinded with passion, readily agreed and commanded Agastya and other sages to carry him Ina
palanquin to Saci's palace. In his eagerness to see the celestial lady, he goaded the bearers to proceed apace, and even
touched the venerable sage Agastya with his foot saying "Move on, move on (#4, #4) -Enraged at this insolent behaviour on
Ihe part of the arrogant monarch, the sage pronounced a curse agaist him thathe should fall down and be rebom in the serpent
race. The execration uttered by the sage could not be otherwise and the king fell down at once from heaven and was
transformed into a python and eventually redeemed in the following Owapara age by the virtuous king Yudhisthira.
