232 ऽ’प्ताळू/ग्र्प्) 8'-!/’\6^\/^गां^ _[ dis. 30

Wo तया चात्मरत आत्मारामोऽप्यखण्डित: | कामिनां दर्शयन् दन्यत्नीणाचवटुरात्पताम 1341

Thus (imitating the pastimes of the Lord and) enquiring of the creepers and trees of
Vrndavana (once more) about Sri Krsna, the cowherd women noticed in a certain part of the
forest the footprints of the Lord (embodying the Supreme Spirit). (24) (They said to one
another,) "Surely these are the footprints of the high-souled Darling of Nanda since they are
(easily) distinguished through the marks of a flag, a lotus, a thunderbolt, a goad, abarley seed
and so on. (25) Tracking His path with the help of those footprints, the poor women felt sore
at heart to find before them fhe said footprints interspersed with those of a lady and spoke
to one another (as follows):—(26) "Whose footprints can these be? Who is she that has gone
(this side) in the company of Sri Krsna (the Darling of Nanda) with His forearm placed on her
shoulder, (even) like a she-elephant walking by the side of a male elephant? (27) The
almighty Lord Sri Hari has surely been propitiated by this tady in that, leaving us (all), Sri
Krsna (the Protector of cows) has been pleased to take herapart. (28) Oh, blessed are those
particles of dust under the feet of Govinda, O friends, that (even) Brahma (the creator), Lord
Siva and Goddess Rama have borne on the crown of their head in order to drive away their
agony of separation (from Him). (29) Those footprints, that meet our eyes, of that lady, who
having stolen away Sri Krsna enjoys alone in secret the (nectar of) lips of that immortal Lord,
the (common) property of the Gopis are causing great agitation in our mind. (30) (Proceeding
further the Gopis remarked,) her footprints are not to be noticed here. Surely the Darling has
lifted up His lady-love, whose delicate soles were being pricked with (sharp) blades of
grass.(31) O cowherd women, behold these footprints, sunk deeper (into the soil), of the
love-stricken Sti Krsna who was (apparently) weighed down by a (heavy) load, carrying His
sweetheart (as He did). (32) (Going still further, the Gopis observed,) on this spot the lady-
love has (obviously) been set down by the high-souled Lord for the sake of (gathering)
flowers.* (Moving still further they said,) here flowers have been gathered by the Darling for
the sake of His beloved, behold these impressions, which are not entire, indicating that the
Lord (evidently) trod on the fore part of His feet (here). (33) (Proceeding still further, they
said,) here it seems the hair of that loving lady have been done by the love-stricken Lord,
while here the Lord has surely squatted (on the ground) while fastening the flowers to her
braid." (34) (Sri Suka continued) though (ever) delighted in Himself and sporting with His own
self and remaining unaffected (by the charms of lovely women), Sri Krsna toyed with that lady
in order to illustrate the wretched plight of the love-stricken as well as the evil-mindedness
of women. (35)

waa दर्शयन्त्यस्ताश्चेरुर्गोप्यो विचेतस: 1 यां गोपीमनयत्कृष्णो विहायान्या: Peet वने ।३६॥

सा च मेने तदाऽऽत्मानं वरिष्ठं सर्वयोषिताम्। हित्वा गोपी: कामयाना मामसौ भजते प्रिय: 1301

ad गत्वा वनोद्देशं दृप्ता केशवमब्रवीत्।न पारयेऽहं चलितुं नय मां यत्र ते मन: ।३८॥

ware: प्रियामाह wa आरुह्यतामिति । ततश्चान्तर्दधे कृष्ण: सा वधूरन्वतप्यत ।३९॥

हा नाथ wo प्रेष्ठ क्वासि aie महाभुज । दास्यास्ते कृपणाया मे सखे दर्शय सन्निधिम् ।४०॥

अन्विच्छन्त्यो भगवतो ant गोप्योऽविदूरत: । ददृशु: प्रियविङ्लेषमोहितां दु:खितां सखीम् se

तया कथितमाकर्ण्य मानप्राप्तिं च माधवात्। अवमानं च cree विस्मयं परमं ययु: ।४२॥
Thus showing to one another what they saw, the cowherd women wandered in a
bewildered state. That Gopi, again, whom Sri Krsna had taken away (with Him), leaving (all)

* The whole of verse 32 and the first fine of the following have not been commented upen by Sndhara Swami, the earliest
commentator of Srimad Bhagavata, and not even by Sn Vallabhacarya. which shows that they were not recognized by them
as torming part of the text of Snmad Bhagavata.
