“Fes SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

SOR Ri HOt a AMA HAE NAHAS EEE EEE HEAR ASHEN EK EEN VELA THUD TSH H eH eR Hee AH

सर्वतोभद्रमिति। ex येष्वमरपरिवृढा: सह सुरललनाललामयूथपतय उपदेवगणैरुपगीयमानमहिमान:
किल विहरन्ति। १५ |

Likewise to the south of llavrta, and extending from east to west, stand the (three
mountain ranges called) Nisadha, Hemakdta and Himalaya—each possessing a height of
ten thousand Yojanas (80,000 miles)and severally marking the boundaries of Harivarsa,
Kimpurusavarsa and Bharatavarsa.(9) Even so to the west and east of llavrta stand the
(mountain ranges of) Malyavan and Gandhamadana respectively, severally extending as far
as the Nila mountain (on the north) and the Nisadha mountain (on the south) and covering
a breadth of two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles) each. They mark the boundaries of (the
Varsas called) Ketumala and Bhadraswa (respectively). (10) On the four sides of Mount
Meru stand the Mandara, Merumandara, Suparswa and Kumuda mountains, forming its
buttresses (as it were), and having a length and height of ten thousand Yojanas (80,000
miles). (11) On these four (mountains) stand four big trees of mango, Jamba (rose-apple),
Kadamba and banyan (respectively) looking like their flags, each possessing a height of one
thousand and one hundred Yojanas (8,800 miles) anda diameter of a hundred Yojanas (800
miles) (at its trunk), and its branches extending within a diameter equal to its height. (12)
(Besides these trees) there are four lakes (as well) of milk , honey, sugar-cane juice and fresh
water (respectively). The demigods (the Yaksas, Kinnaras and so on) who drink of these,
0 Pariksit (the foremost of the Bharatas), enjoy mystic powers as a natural
consequence.(13) There are also four celestial gardens, called Nandana, Caitraratha,
Vaibhrajaka and Sarvatobhadra. (14) In these gardens the foremost of gods, leading a bevy
of most charming celestial beauties with them, carry on (their) sports, their glories being sung
by hosts of demigods. (15)

TTR, एकादशशतयोजनोत्तुङ्गदेवचूतशिरसो गिरिशिखरस्थूलानि फलान्यमृतकल्पानि
पतन्ति।१६। तेषां विशीर्यमाणानामतिमधुरसुरभिसुगन्धिबहुलारुणरसोदेनारुणोदा नाम नदी
मन्दरगिरिशिखरान्निपतन्ती पूर्वेणेलावृतमुपप्लाववचति।१७॥। यदुपजोषणाद्भवान्या अनुचरीणां
पुण्यजनवधूनामवयवस्पर्शसुगन्धवातो दशयोजनं समन्तादनुवासयति। १८ एवं जम्बूफलानामत्युच्च-
निपाततविशीर्णानामनस्थिप्रायाणामिभकायनिभानां रसेनजम्बूनामनदीमेरुमन्दरशिखरादयुतयोजनादवनितले
निपतन्ती दक्षिणेनात्मानं यावदिलावृतमुपस्यन्दयति।१९॥ तावदुभयोरपि रोधसोर्या मृत्तिका
तद्रसेनानुविध्यमाना वाय्वर्कसंयोगविपाकेन सदामरलोकाभरणं जाम्बूनदं नाम Yat भवति। २० । यदु
ह ara विबुधादय: सह युवतिभिर्मुकुटकटककटिसूत्राद्याभरणरूपेण खलु धारयन्ति। २१

From the top of the celestial mango tree, eleven hundred Yojanas high, standing on the
bosom of Mount Mandara, drop down fruits as colossal as a mountain-peak and luscious
as nectar. (16) A river, Arunoda (lit., having red water) by name—so-called because of its
carrying as water the most delicious, (naturally) fragrant and highly perfumed (with other
scents), abundant and scarlet juice of these fruits bursting open (with the fall) flows from the
summit of Mount Mandara andirrigates the eastern part of Ilavrta. (17) The breeze perfumed
by contact with the person of Yaksa ladies forming the retinue of Goddess Parvati (the divine
Consort of Lord Siva) surcharges with fragrance the whole area about them as for as ten
Yojanas (80 miles), (whichis possible only) because of their drinking this water. (18) Similarly
ariver, Jamba by name, emanating from the juice of rose-apples of the size of elephants and
having very small seeds, burst open as a result of their fall from an exceedingly high level,
falls from the summit of Mount Merumandara, ten thousand Yojanas high, on the earth
(below) and waters the whole of (the southern part of) Ilavrta, standing to the south of that
river. (19) The clay on both the banks (of this river), getting saturated all over with that juice,
and undergoing a chemical change under the joint action of the wind and the sun, is
transmuted into (high-class) gold, known by the name of Jambunada, which ever serves to
