Dis. 3] BOOK TEN 113

ककक न्नामा enerrAHeshesesensheneteereennHeer henner anehennne nth eee

of meditation (for the seekers of liberation). (28) Let not that wicked one know of Your birth
through me, O slayer of the demon Madhu! | am terribly afraid, for Your sake, of Karnsa and
(feel) much agitated at heart. (29) Withdraw,O Soul of the universe, this four-armed
transcendent form adorned with the splendour of a conch, a discus, a mace anda lotus. (30)
It is a truism that You, the Supreme Person, hold at the end of the cosmic night (final
dissolution) in Your Body this (vast) universe with enough space about it. That You as such
should have entered my womb, Oh that is surely an imitation of human ways. (31)

त्वमेव qdefsy: gfe: स्वायम्भुवे सति । तदायं सुतपा नाम प्रजापतिरकल्मष: 1321
युवां वै ब्रह्मणाऽऽदिष्टौ प्रजासर्गे यदा aa: । सन्नियम्येन्द्रियथ्रामं तेपाथे परमं तप: 1331
वर्षवातातपहिमघर्मकालगुणाननु । सहमानो श्वासरोधविनिर्धूतमनोमलौ । ३४॥
शीर्णपर्णानिलाहारावुपद्लान्तेन चेतसा । मत्त: कामानभीप्सन्तौ मदाराधनमीहतु: 1341
एवं वां तप्यतोस्तीव्रे तप: परमदुष्करम्। दिव्यवर्षसहस्राणि द्वादशोयुर्मदात्मनो: 1361
तदा वां परितुष्ठोऽहममुना वपुषानघे। तपसा श्रद्धया नित्यं भक्त्या च हदि भावित: 1301
प्रादुरासं वरदराड् युवयो: कामदित्सया । व्रियतां वर इत्युक्ते WER वां वृत: Ga: ।३८॥
अजुष्टग्राम्यविषयावनपत्यो च दम्पती । न वव्राथेऽपवर्गं मे मोहितौ मम मायया । ३९
गते मयि युचां लब्ध्वा at मत्सदूशं सुतम् । ग्राम्यान् भोगानभुञ्जाथां yal प्राप्तमनोरथौ ।४०॥
EEA लोके शीलौदार्यगुणै: समम्। अहं सुतो वामभवं पृश्निगर्भ इति श्रुत: vel
तयोर्वा पुनरेवाहमदित्यामास कर्यपात्। उपेन्द्र इति विख्यातो वामनत्वाच्च वामन: ।४२॥
तृतीयेऽस्मिन् भवेऽहं वै तेनैव वपुघाथ वाम्। जातो भूयस्तयोरेव सत्यं मे व्याहतं सति ।४३॥
we वां दर्शितं रूपं प्राग्जन्मस्मरणाय मे।नान्यथा wed ज्ञानं मर्त्यलिङ्गेन जायते ।४४॥
qi wl पुत्रभावेन ब्रह्मभावेन weed! चिन्तयन्तौ Faas यास्येथे मद्गतिं पराम् ।४५॥

The Lord replied : In a previous life (the third incarnation preceding the present one),
in course of the Swayambhuva Manvantara you alone, O good lady, were PrSni. In that life
he (your husband) was a sinless Prajapati, Sutapa by name. (32) When indeed you two were
commanded by Brahma to beget progeny, thereupon you both practised most rigid
austerities, fully controlling your senses. (33) Enduring one after another the peculiarities of
the (various) seasons in the form of rain, storm, sunshine, snow and heat, nay, subsisting
(now) on withered leaves and (now) on air alone and with the impurities of your mind wiped
out through breath-control, you performed My worship with a calm mind, seeking the objects
of your desire from Me. (34-35) While you with your mind fixed on Me, were both thus
practising severe austerities, most difficult to practise, O good lady, twelve thousand celestial
years rolled by. (36) Constantly contemplated upon in the heart with reverence and devotion
coupled with asceticism, and highly pleased with you both, O sinless one, I, the foremost of
(all) bestowers of boons, appeared on that occasion in this (very) form with the desire of
conferring (on you) the blessings sought by you both. When the words, "Ask any boon of your
choice” were uttered (by Me), a son like Me was asked for by you. (37-38) Having not (yet)
tasted the pleasures of sense and not blessed with any issue, you, husband and wife, did
not ask (the boon of) final beatitude of Me, infatuated as you were by My Maya. (39) Having
secured the desired boon of (getting) a son like Me and having (thus) realized your ambition,
you proceeded when | had left, to enjoy the sensuous pleasures. (40) Not finding anyone else
in the world alike in amiable disposition, magnanimity and other qualities, | (Myself) was born
as your son and became known by the name of Prsnigarbha (son of PrSni). (41) Once more
