462 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 82

७११ १११६ esses esse # १ 29 2 429 esti 99१ १9 222 # 99 9 99 #9 # # 982 # 999 9२9 99 ih # १9 १ ८ 4 ७४8 ञ १ अ 9 ६

women also greeted and looked ai one another with smiles and side long glances full of love
and folded one another in their arms. While doing so they pressed to their bosoms the
bosoms of another smeared with saffron-paste, and tears of love stood in their eyes. (16) The
younger ones bowed to the elders, and were themselves bowed toby those still younger, and
welcoming one another and enquiring after their mutual welfare, they related to one another
(enchanting) stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (17)

पृथा भ्रातॄन् स्वसूर्वींक्ष्य तत्पुत्रान् पितरावपि । भ्रातृपत्नीर्मुकुन्दं च जहौ संकथया Ya: 1१८1
(Pariksit!) Kunti, when she saw her brothers and sisters with their children, as also her
parents, sisters-in-law and Bhagavan Sri Krsna, had her grief soothed in conversation with
them. (18) ॥
Paya
आर्य भ्रातरहं मन्ये आत्मानमकृताशिषम्। यद् वा आपत्सु मद्वार्तां नानुस्मरथ BAT: 1281
wet mee: पुत्रा भ्रातर: पितरावपि । नानुस्मरन्ति स्वजनं ge दैवमदक्षिणम् । २०॥
Kunti (addressing Vasudeva) sald : My brother, | find myself extremely unfortunate.
Not a single desire of mine has been fulfilled. What a pity that even noble brothers like you

should forget me during my calamities! (19) | am now convinced that friends, relations, sons,
brothers and even parents forget one on whom fortune does not smile. (Why should | blame

you for this?) (20)
वसुदेव उवाच
awe मास्मानसूयेथा दैवक्रीडनकान् नरान्।ईशस्य हि ad लोक: कुरुते कार्यतेऽथवा 1221
कंसप्रतापिता: wd ad याता fet दिशम्। एतह्येव पुन: स्थानं दैवेनासादिता: qa: ।२२1
Vasudeva replled: Dear sister, donot find fault with us. We, mortals, are nothing buttoys
in the hands of Providence. The worid is subject to the control of the Supreme Ruler, and
everyone acts and is made to act according to His will. (21) Sister, you are aware how

harassed by Karnsa, we had to flee from one quarter to another. It is only now that we have
been restored to a secure position by Providence. (22)
उवाच

वसुदेवोग्रसेनाद्यैर्यदुभिस्तेऽर्चिता नृपा: | आसन्नच्युतसन्दर्शपरमानन्दनिर्वृता: 1234
भीष्मो द्रोणोऽम्बिकापुत्रो गान्धारी ससुता तथा । सदारा: पाण्डवा: कुन्ती सृञ्जयो विदुर: कृप: 1२४॥
कुन्तिभोजो विराटश्च भीष्मको नग्नजिन्महान्। पुरुजिद् द्रुपद: ल्यो धृष्टकेतु: सकाझिराद् । २५॥
दमघोषो विशालाक्षो मैथिलो मद्रकेकयौ । युधामन्यु: geal च ससुता बाह्लिकादय: 1261
राजानो ये च wre युधिष्ठिरमनुव्रता: । श्रीनिकेतं aq: ah: celts वीक्ष्य विस्मिता: 1201
अथ ते रामकृष्णाभ्यां weg प्राप्तसमर्हणा: । प्रशशंसुर्मुदा युक्ता वृष्णीन् कृष्णपरिग्रहान् ।२८॥
अहो भोजपते यूयं जन्मभाजो नृणामिह | यत् पद्यथासकृत् कृष्णं दुर्दर्शमपि योगिनाम् । २९॥
यद्विश्रुति: श्रुतिनुतेदमलं पुनाति पादावनेजनपयश्च वचश्च ae!
भू: कालभर्जितभगापि यदङ्घ्रिपद्मस्पर्शोत्थशक्तिरभिवर्षति नोऽखिलार्थान् । ३०॥
तद्दर्शनस्पर्शानानुपथप्रजल्पराय्यासनाशानसयौनसपिण्डबन्ध: ।
. यैर्षा गृहे निरयवर्त्मनि वर्ततां a: स्वर्गापवर्गविरम: स्वयमास विष्णु: 1391
Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit!) (all) the kings present there were duly honoured by
Vasudeva, Ugrasena and the other Yadus, and they felt supremely delighted and gratified
