712 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11

SORONORE SRC BENE ME MORE REMY GER RMSE BE BEBE ERC EM BECKS SERA MRR RY ERROR ETC GENRE CR ERE RE HTH RON Re RE एहं

(about His loins) and the (sacred) syllable OM (consisting of three parts अ + उ + 4) in the triple
sacred thread. The Lord wears (the philosophical systems of) Sankhya and Yoga as a pair
of alligator-shaped ear-rings and the realm of Brahma (the highest functionary of this
universe), promising fearlessness to all its inhabitants, as His diadem. (11-12) The
Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) is the seat (couch), going by the name of Sesa (the serpent-
god), which He remains nestled in; and Sattvaguna (the principle of harmony or goodness),
characterized by (the six divine) properties such as Dharma (righteousness) and JAana
(wisdom), (the other four being AiSwarya or universal dominion, Yaga or glory, Sri or
affluence and Vairagya or dispassion, as well as by the divine potencies known by the names
of Vimala, Utkarsini, JAana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya, [sana and Anugraha)—is spoken of
as the lotus spread on this (seat). (13) He wields Prana or the vital air (the foremost of the
five airs existing in the body under the names of Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and
Samana)—accompanied by organic, mental and bodily strength— in the form of a mace
(bearing the name of Kaumodaki); the principle of water, in the form of an excellent conch
(Paficajanya by name); the principle of fire, as (the discus) SudarSana; the principle of ether
as a sword, clear as the sky; a shield consisting of Tamas (the principle of inertia and
ignorance); a bow, made of horns, as representing Kala (the Time-Spirit) and a quiver
consisting of Karma (the principle of activity). (14-15) Knowing persons declare the (ten
cosmic) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) to be His shafts,
the (cosmic) mind (characterized by the power of action) to be His chariot, and the (five)
Tanmatras (subtle elements) to be the exterior of the chariot; and He exhibits His service-
ability (to His devotees in the shape of conferring boons on and assuring protection to them)
through Mudras (positions of the hands such as Vara and Abhaya). (16) The spot where the
deity is worshipped should be visualized as the orb of the sun; the ceremony of initiation (by
a Guru) into a certain Mantra (sacred text) should be contemplated as the act of self-
consecration (which makes one eligible for the worship of a particular deity) and the worship
of the Lord should be concieved as the eradication of (all) one's sins. (17)

भगवान् weet लीलाकमलमुद्वहन्। धर्मं ay भगवांश्चामरव्यजनेऽभजत् eel
आतपत्रं तु वैकुण्ठं द्विजा धामाकुतोभयम्। त्रिवृद्वेद: सुपर्णाख्यो यज्ञं वहति पूरुषम् ।१९॥
अनपायिनी भगवती श्री: साक्षादात्मनो हरे: । विषुक्सेनस्तन्त्रमूर्तिर्विदित: पार्षदाधिप: ।
नन्दादयोऽष्टौ द्वा:स्थाश्च तेऽणिमाद्या हरेर्गुणा: (Ro |
वासुदेव: सङ्कर्षण: wae: पुरुष: स्वयम्। अनिरुद्ध इति ब्रह्मन् मूर्तिव्यूहोऽभिधीयते ।२१॥
स विश्वस्तैजस: प्राज्ञरतुरीय gia वृत्तिभि: । अर्थेन्द्रियाशयज्ञानैर्भगवान् परिभाव्यते ।२२॥
। बिभर्ति स्म चतुर्मूर्तिर्भगवान् हरिरीश्चर: 1231

Wielding ‘in one of His four hands) His six distinguishing attributes (viz., lordship,
righteousness, renown, affluence, wisdom and dispassion each in its entirety (denoted by
the term ‘Bhaga’*) in the form ofa lotus carried for the sake of diversion, and thus justifying
the name of Bhagavan, the Lord (also) maintains (by His side in the hands of two of His divine
attendants) righteousness and renown (two of the aforesaid six attributes) as a chowrie and
a fan (respectively). (18) He further bears (over His head) as an umbrella, O Brahmanas !
His (own divine) realm, viz., Vaikuntha, which has no fear from any quarter. The Vedat , with
its three divisions (Rk, Yajus and Sama) figures (as His carrier) under the name of Garuda

* रेशवर्यस्य समग्रस्य धर्मस्य यशस: श्रिय: । ज्ञानवैराग्ययोश्चैव षण्णां भग इतोरणा ॥
1 The Sruti ऽ४%ऽ:--सुपर्णोऽसि गरुत्मास्तरवृत्ते शिर: ।
