4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16

SEW OROM Rt Rt BITTY RE RO OH EEE CEN SK KEK TEENS RH Lee eH NLL Hee eH He Oe HH व

निर्हृत्य ज्ञातयो ज्ञातेर्देहं कृत्वोचिता: feo: aaa «Se शोकमोहभयार्तिदम् ।१३॥
यमुनायां महाराज स्मरन्त्यो द्विजभाषितम् । ex |

स su प्रतिबुद्धात्मा चित्रकेतुर्दिजोक्तिभि: । गृहान्धकूपान्निष्क्रान्त: सर:पङ्कादिव द्विष: । १५॥

कात्विढांविधिबत्स्नात्वाबृक्तपुण्यजलक्खि:।पौनेन संयतप्राणो ब्रह्मपुत्राववन्दत । १६॥

अथ तस्मै प्रपन्नाय भक्ताय प्रयतात्मने। भगवान्नारद: प्रीतो विद्यामेतामुवाच ह ।१७॥

ae नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते वासुदेवाय धीमहि । प्रद्युम्नायानिरुद्धाय नम: सङ्कर्षणाय च ।१८॥
नमो `विज्ञानमात्राय परमानन्दमूर्तये । आत्मारामाय जशान्ताय निवृत्तद्वैतदृष्टये ।१९॥
आत्मानन्दानुभूत्यैव न्यस्तशक्तयूर्मये नम:। हृषीकेशाय महते नमस्ते विश्वमूर्तये । २०॥
वचस्युपरतेऽप्राप्य य एको मनसा सह। अनामरूपश्चिन्मात्र: सोऽव्यान्न: सदसत्पर: 1221
afafe wage तिष्ठत्यप्येति madi garage मृज्ञातिस्तस्मे ते ब्रह्मणे` नम: 1221

wa war न विदुर्मनोबुद्धीन्द्रयासव: । अन्तर्बहिश्च विततं व्योमवत्तन्नतोऽस्म्यहम् 1231
नैवान्यदा लोहमिवाप्रतप्तं स्थानेषु तद् BUTT । २४॥

कमलकुड्मलोपलालितचरणारविन्दयुगल परम परमेष्टिन्नमस्ते । २५1

Sri Suka continued : Having spoken thus, the spirit (of the departed prince)
disappeared; and, struck with wonder, those kinsmen of his then gave up mourning (for him),
cutting asunder their ties of affection. (12) After cremating the body (of the dead child) and
performing the rites appropriate to the occasion, the kinsmen (of the prince) set aside their
affection, which is so difficult to get rid of and which is a source of grief, infatuation, fear and
agony. (13) Remembering the words of the sage Angira (which opened their eyes) the
queens that had brought about the death of the child (by poisoning it) and had lost their
splendour due to (the sin of) child-murder, felt (much) ashamed and performed penance on
the bank of the (holy) Yamuna in that city (Mathura) by way of atonement for infanticide, as
prescribed by the Brahmanas, O great king (Pariksit). (14) Having thus realized the Self
through the words of the sages (Angira and Narada), Emperor Citraketu rose from the
deceptive well of metempsychosis even as an elephant (lit., that which drinks with two
organs, viz., the mouth and the proboscis) would from the mire of a lack. (15) Having
performed his ablutions in the water of) the (holy) Yamuna with due ceremony and gone
through other sacred rites accomplished with water, and with his senses entirely subdued,
he bowed in silence at the feet of the two (celebrated) sons of Brahma (the creator). (16)
Then the divine sage Narada joyously taught, it is said, the following prayer to that devotee
(Citraketu), who had resorted to him (for protection) and had fully controlled his mind:—(17)
"Hail to You, the divine Vasudeva (presiding over the intellect and) denoted by the mystical
syllable OM, and obeisance to You as Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Sankarsana (presiding
over reason, the mind and ego respectively). We contemplate on You (in all these four
manifestations). (18) Hail to You, who are absolute consciousness and an embodiment of
supreme bliss, who revelin Your own Self and are (perfectly) tranquil and whose eye is (ever)
turned away from duality (who look upon everything as non-different from Yourself). (19) Hail
to You, who have kept aloof by the very realization of Your, blissful character (all)
disturbances (in the shape of likes and dislikes) caused by Your Maya (deluding potency)!
