Dis. 24 ] BOOK NINE 93

SER RRC rine tee ERE LEER 3 व न ज्ज ASAE AEE ESAS ERATE He ee HHL HELENA HER

wal स जनयामास Bl पुत्रानकल्मषान्। वसुदेवं देवभागं देवश्रवसमानकम् । २८।
सृञ्जयं war कङ्कं wis वत्सकं वृकम्। देवदुन्दुभयो नेदुरानका यस्य जन्मनि । २९।
वसुदेवं हरे: SM वदन्त्यानकदुन्दुभिम्। gn च श्रुतदेवा च श्रुतकीर्ति: श्रुतश्रवा: 1301
राजाधिदेवी चैतेषां भगिन्य: ws कन्यका: | कुन्ते: सख्यु: पिता शूरो ह्यपुत्रस्य पृथामदात् । ३१।
साऽऽप दुर्वाससो विद्यां देवहूतीं प्रतोषितात्। तस्या वीर्यपरीक्षार्थमाजुहाव रविं Bory । ३२॥
तदैवोपागतं देवं वीक्ष्य विस्मितमानसा । प्रत्ययार्थं प्रुक्ता मे याहि देव क्षमस्व मे । ३३॥
अमोघं दर्शनं देवि आधत्से त्वयि चात्मजम्। योनिर्यथा न दुष्येत wale ते सुमध्यमे । ३४॥
gf wet स आधाय गर्भं सूर्यो दिवं गत: । सद्य: कुमार: संजज्ञे द्वितीय इव भास्कर: ।३५॥
तंसप्त्यजन्रदीतोयेकृच्छ्रक्कोकस्यविभ्यर्तौ।प्नपितापह्वस्तापुव्राहपाण्ह्रुर्वैसत्यस्रिक्रप।३६।

From (the loins of) Vidiiratha (the son of Citraratha) appeared Stra, whose son was
Bhajamana. From Bhajamana followed Sini, of whom was born Swayambhoja; and Hrdika
was recognizd as the latter's son. (26) Devabahu, Satadhanva and Krtavarméa were the sons
of Hrdika. 804 (Surasena) was the son of Devamidha (who is known from other sources*
to be the fourth son of Hrdika). Sura’s wife was Marisa by name. (27) Through her he begot
ten faultless sons—Vasudeva, Devabhaga, Devasrava, Anaka, Srijaya, Syamaka, Kanka,
Samika, Vatsaka and Vrka. They call Vasudeva—a (fit) receptacle for the descent of Si
Hari—as Anakadundubhi inasmuch as on the (happy) occasion of his birth kettledrums
(Dundubhis) and larger drums (Anakas) of the gods sounded (of themselves). Prtha (Kunti)
and Srutadeva, Srutakirti, Srutasrava and, Rajadhidevi—these five girls were the sisters of
the aforesaid (Vasudeva and others). Their father, Sra, actually gave Prtha (in adoption)
to his friend, Kunti, who was issueless. (28—-31) From the sage Durvasa, who got highly
pleased with her (for her services rendered to him when he called on her father as an
unexpected guest), she received a (certain) Mantra by means of which gods can be easily
invoked; (and) in order to test its efficacy she invoked the lustrous sun-god. (32) Astonished
in mind to behold the god arrived in her presence that very moment, she (apologetically)
said, "The spell was employed by me for the sake of trial (alone). (Therefore, kindly) return
and forgive me (my audacity)." (33) (The sun god replied,) "My sight never goes in vain,
O godly virgin! | intend to beget a son through you. | shall (so) arrange that your virginity is
not impaired, 0 beautiful damsel |" (34) So saying, the son-god deposited his seed in her
womb and returned to heaven. That very moment a male child—who was another sun as
it were, was born of her without any travail. (35) Afraid of the world (however), she painfully
consigned the child to the stream of a river. (Later on) your great grandfather, Pandu, of
genuine valour duly married her. (36)

gmat तु कारूषो वृद्धणर्मा समग्रहीत्। यस्यामभूद् दन्तवक्त्र ऋषिशप्तो दिते: सुत: 1३७1

कैकेयो धृष्टकेतुश्च श्रुतकीर्तिमविन्दत | सन्तर्दनादयस्तस्य पञ्चासन् कैकया: सुता: । ३८॥
राजाधिदेव्यामावन्त्यौ जयसेनोऽजनिष्ट ह। दमघोषश्चेदिराज: भ्रुतश्रवसमग्रहीत् ।३९॥
शिशुषाल: सुतस्तस्या: कथितस्तस्य सम्भव:। देवभागस्व कंसायां चित्रकेतुबृहद्बलौ ॥४०॥
कंसवत्यां देवश्रवस: सुवीर इषुमांस्तथा | कङ्कायामानकाजात: सत्यजित् पुरुजित् तथा ।४१।
सृञ्जयो wget च वृषदुर्मर्षणादिकान्।हरिकेशहिरण्याक्षौ शूरभूम्यां च इयामक: 1४२
16 Vignupurana 88%75;---तस्यापि कृतवर्मशतघनुर्देवमोढुषादा: पुत्रा वभूवु:। देवमीढुषस्य शूरस्यापि मारिषा नाम पत्न्यभवत्। तस्यां चासौ दश

aay वसुदॆवपूर्वान्।
