Dis. 7 ] BOOK SEVEN 677
SERRA AR AA RE RAT TT RR I RIO Oe tree EEE
व्यात्र्वे न त् BCH हो त् Oe OH वी ।

In order to assuage her grief and for my sake too the compassionate and powerful sage
imparted (to her instruction in) both the essence of religion (in the shape of Devotion to the
Lord) and pure wisdom (discrimination between the Self and non-Self). (15) That teaching,
however, disappeared from the mind of my mother due to (the inordinate) length of time (that
has since elapsed) and because of her womanly nature. Its memory has not (however) left
me, the favoured of the sage, even to this moment. (16) That devotion and wisdom can take
root in you too if you give credence to my words. Through faith such sense as is proficient
in uprooting the feeling of identification with the body etc. can appear even in women and
children as it has dawned on me. (17) Through the agency of Time, which is by its very nature
capable of bringing about transformation, the six well-known states of being commencing
with birth (viz., birth, existence, growth, ripeness, decay and destruction) are seen in relation
to the body (so long as it is connected with a soul) and not in relation to the soul, just as they
are observed in the fruits of a tree (so long as they exist on the tree, and notin the tree itself,
which stands comparatively longer). (18) The Spiritis eternal, free from decay, taintless, one
(without a second), the knowing subject, the ground (of everything), changeless, self-seeing
(self-effulgent), the cause (of the universe), all-pervading, unattached and having no sheath
(of Maya). (19) With the help of these twelve transcendent characteristics of the Self a wise
man should give up the false notion ` and 'mine'—sprung from ignorance—with reference
to the body and persons and things connected with the body. (20) Just as a goldsmith
acquainted with the process (smelting etc.), of extracting gold from its ore is able through
those processes to find gold in the ore existing in gold mines, so is a man well-versed in

the science of the Spirit able to discover the (true) nature of Brahma in the bodies (of the
various Jivas)—which are so many fields (as it were)—through the (diverse) processes of
ascertaining the true nature of the Self. (21)
अष्टा प्रकृतय: प्रोक्तासत्रय एव fe तद्गुणा: | विकारा: षोडशाचार्यै: पुमानेक: समन्वयात् । २२।
देहस्तु सर्वसंघातो जगत् तस्थुरिति द्विधा। अत्रैव मृग्य: पुरुषो नेति नेतीत्यतत् त्यजन् । २३॥
fara faa x | td arf = 5: 12%
बुद्धेर्जागरणं स्वप्न: सुषुप्तिरिति वृत्तय: । ता येनैवानुभूयन्ते सोऽध्यक्ष: पुरुष: पर: । २५॥
Weert fe संसारो गुणकर्मनिबन्धन: | अज्ञानमूलोऽपार्थोऽपि qa: स्वप्न saat 1201

(Out of the total number of categories into which the entire creation has been ultimately
resolved) by teachers (of the science of the Spirit, the sage Kapila and others) eight (viz.,
Prakrti or primordial Matter, the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego
and the five subtle elements) have been declared to be the causes; three (viz., Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas) are as a matter of fact only modes of Prakrti (and therefore not distinct from it);
sixteen (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action, the mind and the five
gross elements) are modifications and the Spirit is spoken of as one because of its
connection with ail (as their witness). (22) Of course, the body, (which is) a concatenation
of all (these), is of two kinds—mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate). It is here (in the
body) that discarding everything else as ‘not this', the Spirit, should be sought for by men
coolly reflecting on the creation, continued existence and dissolution of the universe with a
mind purified (rendered acute) through reasoning (both) on the lines of Anvaya (the all-
pervasiveness of the Spirit) and Vyatireka (the distinctness of the Spirit from everything
else). (23-24) Wakefulness, dream and deep sleep—these are the (three) functions of the
intellect. (And) he alone by whom they are (directly) cognized is the transcendent Spirit, the
“itness (of all material phenomena). (25) By means of these modifications of the intellect,
