Dis. 11] BOOK EIGHT 781

HABER EESRALHAAAEEEE REE TH WEE See eR I Ee he RE RTO ER RR Rh eri
प्त ES Se OE OE Sr Oe Me Ar tr क क ती eB ह

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse Xl

Conclusion of the conflict between the gods and the demons
वि
अथो सुरा: प्रत्युपलब्धचेतस: we पुंस: परयानुकम्पया ।
way . शक्रसमीरणादयस्तांस्तान् रणे यैरभिसंहता: पुरा । |
वैरोचनाय संरब्धो भगवान्पाकशासन:। उदयच्छद् यदा वज्रं प्रजा हाहेति चुक्रुशु: । २ ।
वज्रपाणिस्तमाहेदे तिरस्कृत्य पुर:स्थितम्।मनस्विनं सुसम्पन्नं fad महामृधे । ३ |
नटवन्मूढ मायाभिर्मायेशान् नो जिगीषसि । जित्वा बालान् निबद्भाक्षान् नटो हरति तद्धनम् । ४ ।
आरुरुक्षन्ति मायाभिरुत्सिसृप्सन्ति ये दिवम्। तान्दस्यून्विधुनोम्यज्ञान्पूर्वस्माच्च पदादध: । ५ ।
ase दुर्मायिनस्तेऽद्य वज्रेण झतपर्वणा । शिरो हरिष्ये मन्दात्मन्घटस्व ज्ञातिभि: we ६ |
Sri Suka resumed: Having regained (their) presence of mind by the supreme grace of
Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), the gods headed by Indra ( the ruler of the gods) and
Samirana (the wind-god), now struck hard each one of those (Asuras) by whom they had
been jointly assailed before. (1) When the glorious Indra (the chastiser of the demon Paka),
full of anger, took up his thunderbolt in order to strike Bali (the son of Virocana), his subjects
cried "Alas |" "Alas |" (2) Reproaching the heroic Bali, who was well-equipped (with arms)
and was ranging fearlessly before Indra in that great conflict, Indra (who wielded a
thunderboltin his hand), addressed him as follows:—(3) Conquering fools whose eyes have
been enchanted, a conjurer takes away their money. (Even so,) though no better than a
Conjurer, O fool, you seek to overpower us, lords of Maya, by means of incantations ! (4)
Those foolish robbers who seek to ascend to heaven, nay, rise (even) beyond heaven (to
still higher regions) by means of spells, | cast still lower down than their former abode. (5)
As such | shall lop off your head today with (my) thunderbolt having a hundred joints, even
though (I know) you are an adeptin the use of melevolent spells. Exert yourself with (all) Your
kinsfolk, O dull-witted one ! (6)

संग्रामे वर्तमानानां कालचोदितकर्मणाम् । कीर्तिर्जयोऽजयो मृत्यु: सर्वेषां स्युरनुक्रमात् । ७ |

ae कालरशनं जना: wear सूरय: । न हृष्यन्ति न झयोचन्ति तत्र यूयमपण्डिता: । ८ ।

न वयं मन्यमानानामात्मानं तत्र साधनम्। गिरो a: Greet गृह्णीमो मर्मताडना: । ९ ।
Bali replied: Fame, triumph, discomfiture and death fallin succession to the lot of all who
are engaged in hostilities and whose actions are impelled by (a propitious or unpropitious)
Time (Destiny). (7) Therefore, wise men view (all) this (fame etc.), at determined by Time;
they neither exult nor grieve over it. You are (however) ignorant of this truth. (8) We (for our
part) do not take to the heart your words that sting one to the quick, since you deserve to
be pitied by pious souls in that you account your own self instrumental in bringing fame and

so on. (9)
SH उवाच
इत्याक्षिप्य fay वीरो नाराचैर्वीरमर्दन: | आकर्णपूर्णैरहनदाक्षेपैराहतं TA: । १०॥
एवं निराकृतो देवो वैरिणा तथ्यवादिना । नामृष्यत् तदधिक्षेपं तोत्राहत sa द्विप: ee!
