Dis. 7 ] BOOK SEVEN 679

RETP LALIT TLCS TETE RAN ELH SHO LTHUATEKL ELEN ATE Ree LNA eR A RELA REMAKE IRMA H
SESE SESSA ESTEE ESCA TSE SASSER ARTES EMT न त् ATERERE RR SRM RARE HENS ANTE
तस्माददृष्टश्रुतदूषणं परं भक्त्यैकयेशं भजतात्मलब्धये 1X0 |

When, on hearing (accounts) of His (brilliant) achievements, incomparable virtues and
heroic deeds wrought through His (various) forms assumed for sport, the devotee sings
loudly with an open throat and in a voice choked with tears, shouts and dances, his hair
standing on end due to excessive delight, nay, when he, like one possessed by an evil spirit,
now laughs, now weeps, now sits in meditation, now greets the people and now, devoid of
shame, exclaims: "O Hari! O Lord of the universe !! 0 Narayana !!!" with his mind fixed on
the Lord (his very Self) and heaving a sigh every now and then, all his bonds get loosened
at that time and his ignorance and latent desires are burnt; and his mind and body being
attuned to Him through contemplation on His pastimes, the man attains to Lord Visnu (who
is above sense-perception) by recourse to the highest device of Devotion. (4—36) The wise
recognize (mental) communion with Lord Visnu as a (sure) means in this world of putting a
stop to the cycle of birth and death in the case of an embodied soul of impure mind and they
(further) recognize it as identical with the bliss of absorption into Brahma. Therefore, worship
that Ruler of your heart in (the very lotus of) your heart. (37) What extraordinary exertion,
O demon boys, is involved in the worship of Sri Hari, one’s own Self and friend, (nay) present
in one's own heart like the space there? What is to be gained through efforts for the
acquisition of objects of senses, such efforts being common to all embodied creatures ? (38)
Riches, wife, animals, sons and other relations, houses, land, elephants, treasury and
luxuries (of various kinds)—(nay,) all kinds of wealth and enjoyments are momentary and
fleeting. What delight can they afford to a mortal? (39) Similarly the well-known (ethereal)
worlds earned by means of sacrifices are (also) perishable and excelled by other (higher)
worlds and are not free from impurities either (because exciting envy in the minds of others).
Therefore, with a view to Self-Realization, worship, with absolute devotion, the supreme
Lord, in whom no fault is seen or (even) heard of. (40)

यदध्यर्थ्यह कर्माणि विद्वन्मान्यसकृन्नर: | करोत्यतो विपर्यासममोघं fad फलम् ।४१॥
सुखाय दु:खमोक्षाय ager इह कर्मिण: | सदाऽऽप्नोतीहया दु:खमनीहाया: सुखावृत: ।४२।
कामान्कामयते काम्यैर्यदर्थमिह षूरूष:।सवैदेहस्तुपारबयोभङ्गुरोयात्युपैतिचन्धिंइ।
किमु व्यवहितापत्यदारागारधनादय: | राज्यं कोशगजामात्यभृत्याप्ता ममतास्पदा: ।४४।
faces: सह देहेन नश्वरै: | अनर्थैरर्थसंकाजीर्नित्यानन्दमहोदधे: ।४५॥
निरूप्यतामिह स्वार्थ: कियान्देहभृतोऽसुरा: | निषेकादिष्वस्थासु क्लिङ्यमानस्य कर्मभि: ISG I
कर्माण्यारभते देही देहेनात्मानुवर्तिना | कर्मभिस्तनुते देहमुभयं त्वविवेकत: ।४७॥
तस्मादर्थाश्च कामाश्च धर्माश्च यदपाश्रया: | भजतानीहयाऽऽत्मानमनीहं हरिमीश्वरम् । ४८1
सर्वेषामपि भूतानां हरिरात्मेश्वर: प्रिय: । भूतैर्महद्भि: स्वकृतै: कृतानां जीवसंज्ञित: ive
देवोऽसुरो मनुष्यो वा yet ward एव च । भजन् मुकुन्दचरणं स्वस्तिमान् स्याद्यथा वयम् | ko |
(Besides) aman accounting himself wise (also) invariably obtains results which are quite
‘he opposite of the object aiming at which he performs actions in this world time and
2gain.(41) The aim of a man given to action here is to secure happiness and freedom from
misery. But he who was (formerly) filled with joy due to desirelessness ever reaps misery
through desire (afterwards). (42) The very body for which the Jiva (an embodied soul)
rankers after enjoyments through actions performed from interested motives actually
2elongs to others (in that it is sure to be devoured by dogs and jackals, crows and vultures,

* left uncared for after death) and (is something that) hugs the soul and (having served it for
2 ‘xed time) departs (leaves it). (43) How much more so are one's progeny, wife, house,
