Dis. 16 ] BOOK FOUR 363°

RAHARAKHA HR TELEHHEK CCE EEKKEALE EEE HEHEHE शं क अऋजीद्टैतधिजी त्दे ॐ कौ कज् क्तय यक HHAREN eee See
प्तञर्त्त सा व व य ee व्ये

the people to tread those paths. He is the preserver of the various systems of moral and
religious life, the ruler who punishes the antagonists that seek to violate them. (4) Though
one, He bears in His own person the bodies of the guardians of the celestial and terrestrial
spheres executing the different functions of beneficence—of protection, promotion of peace
and happiness and furtherance of the general well-being of both heaven and earth,
according to the need, from time to time. (5) He replenishes His royal treasury by collection
of revenue when there is time for it and again expends it by free distribution at times of
emergency, in the same way as the sun, shining brighter, absorbs water and storing it as
vapour for a large part of the year, releases it (abundantly as showers in the rainy season).
He is equally good to all living beings and powerful as the sun. (6) He is also like the earth
(in his kindness and goodness). The earth is trampled upon by all beings, yet she kindly
bestows her benefits on them when they are in distress. She is always compassionate. In
the same way, king Prthu (the son of Vena) is ever gracious and beneficent to His subjects
in Spite of the offences and wrongs done to Him by them, which He forgives (before they ask
for His forgiveness). (7) When the god of clouds will not allow them to rain, so that manifold
sufferings will be caused to living beings, especially human beings, the king will come
forward and, to save all kinds of life, order the clouds to rain asserting His divine power as
Indra, as He is God in the form of a human king. (8) (He is not only like the sun, He is like
the moon too.) He delights the world by His shining face, which is an embodiment of
ambrosial sweetness—-by His bright glances—full of affection and by His lucid smiles,
beaming and beautiful. (9) His ways are inscrutable; His deeds are too deep for thought; the
purposes His mind pursues are too remote for comprehension. His wealth is well protected.
The points of His magnanimity are innumerable; all qualities and attributes concentrate in
Him. Prthu is like the divinity of the ocean completely self-contained. (10)

दुरासदो दुर्विषह आसन्नोऽपि विदूरवत्।नैवाभिभवितुं शक्यो वेनारण्युत्थितोऽनल: 1221
अन्तर्बहिश्च भूतानां wee कर्माणि चारणै: । उदासीन इवाध्यक्षो वायुरात्मेव देहिनाम् । १२।
नादण्ड्ये दण्डयत्येष सुतमात्मद्विषामपि । दण्डयत्यात्मजमपि दण्ड्यं धर्मपथे स्थित: । १३॥

अस्याप्रतिहतं चक्रं पृथोरामानसाचलात्। वर्तते भगवानर्को यावत्तपति गोगणै: । १४॥
रञ्जयिष्यति यल्लोकमयमात्मविचेष्टिते: | अथामुमाहू राजानं मनोरञ्जनके: प्रजा:। १५॥

ead: सत्यसन्धो ब्रह्मण्यो वृद्धसेवक:। शरण्य: सर्वभूतानां मानदो दीनवत्सल: ।१६॥
aque: परस्त्रीषु पत्नामर्धं इवात्मन: | प्रजासु पितृवस्सिग्ध: किङ्करो ब्रह्मवादिनाम् ee!
देहिनामात्मवत्पेष्ठठ deat नन्दिवर्धन: | मुक्तसङ्घप्रसङ्गोऽयं दण्डपाणिरसाधुषु 1221
"He is beyond the reach not only of His enemy’s arms, butalso of the latter's thought. He
is overwhelming in His power exercised against His antagonists. He is as if at a great
distance when He seems to be near. He is invincible in everyway. He is an incandescent
force risen from friction or the body of Vena as fire from wood. (11) Seeing the inner (secret)
as well as the outer efforts and actions of men and other beings through spies, He continues
to be unaffected as an indifferent super-seer as if He were the inner vital spirit that is there
in every living body. (12) He never punishes him who does not deserve to be punished even
if he be the son of those who are determined to do harm to His own self; on the other hand,
He punishes His own son when found guilty, as He is established in the path of truth and
justice. (13) The sphere of the irresistible sway of Prthu, the limit of the advance of His army
and the path of the wheels of His chariot will extend from the Manasottara mountain to the
whole region over which the sun shines with his rays. (14) He will delight (the various sections —
of) His subjects by His own (independent) efforts and works, giving full satisfaction as well
