Dis. 3] BOOK ONE

Br Br ज We दौ He क By BY BR दो ah er कौ BHP RT HY HR HH Be डी री त्तरी क्र दौ ङ हो ही ङी वी REY OH me के ङ BA RT RT RT आ A RHR RE RON RA RT HBR RT RE HB RE RE RY
a ee ae EM BOAT OF न व न GF न न

beings.(32) Entering (as the soul) the various material bodies created by Himself out of the
various evolutes of the three Gunas such as the subtle elements, the senses and the mind,
the Lord enjoys the sense-objects appropriate to such bodies. (33) It is He, again, who
creates the different worlds and descending by way of sport in different species such as the
gods, the human beings and the lower forms of life, protects all the beings through His Sattva
or goodness. (34)

Thus ends the second discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CP ET ET १९
Pod SS

॥ अथ तृतीयोऽध्याय:

Discourse IIl

The Lord's Avatdras or Descents into the world of matter
Yd उवाच

जगृहे पौरुषं रूपं भगवान्महदादिभि:। सम्भूतं षोडशकलमादौ लोकसिसृक्षया । १ ।
Tere ware योगनिद्रां वितन्वत: । नाभिह्रुदाम्बुजादासीद् wen विश्वसृजां पति: । २ ।
यस्यावयवसंस्थानै:; कल्पितो लोकविस्तर: । तद्वै भगवतो रूपं विशुद्धं सत्त्वमूर्जितम् । ३ ।
पङ्यन्त्यदो स्पपमदभ्रचक्षुषा सहस्रपादोरुभुजाननाद्भुतम् |
सहस्रमूर्धश्रवणाक्षिनासिकं सहस्रमौल्यम्बरकुण्डलोल्लसत् । ४ |
एतन्नानावताराणां निधानं बीजमव्ययम् । यस्यांशांशेन gerd देवतिर्यङ्नरादय: । ५ |
Sata says : In the beginning (of creation), with the desire of evolving the different worlds,
the Lord assumed the form of Purusa (the Primal Person) consisting of sixteen component
principles (viz., the ten sense-organs, the five elements and mind) and constituted of Mahat
(the cosmic intellect) etc. (l)While He (the aforesaid Purusa) was displaying His sleep of
Samadhi (absorption into or communion with the Self) reposing on the causal waters, there
appeared from the lake of His navel a lotus wherefrom sprang up Brahma, the lord of
progenitors of the world. (2) Itis on the disposition of His limbs that the various worlds stand
superimposed; that is the most exalted form of the Lord, consisting of pure Sattva or
goodness. (3) The Yogis behold that form by means of their divine eye, wonderful as it is
with its thousands of feet, thighs, arms and faces; it has thousands of heads, ears, eyes
and noses and is resplendent with thousands of diadems, robes and ear-rings. (4) This
form of the Lord (popularly known by the name of Narayana) is the imperishable seed of
the various Avataras and the abode to which they all return (after accomplishing their
purpose). It is by a ray (e.g., Marici) of His ray (Brahma) that gods, human beings and the
lower forms of life are created. (5)

a एव प्रथमं ea: कौमारं सर्गमास्थित: । चचार दुश्चरं ब्रह्मा ब्रह्मचर्यमखण्डितम् « |
fata तु भवायास्य रसातलगतां महीम्। उद्घरिष्यन्नुपादत्त यज्ञेश: सौकरं वपु: । |
तृतीयमृषिसर्गं च देवर्षित्वमुपेत्य स:। तन्त्रं सात्वतमाचष्ट नैष्कर्म्य ado यत: । ८ ।
तुर्ये धर्मकलासर्गे नरनारायणावृषी | भूत्वाऽऽत्मोपशमोपेतमकरोद st तप: । ९ ।
पञ्चम: कपिलो नाम fase: कालविप्नुतम्। प्रोवाचासुरये सांख्यं तत्त्वग्रामविनिर्णयम् ।१०॥
