13 SRIMAD BPAGAVATA [ Dis. 4

eteeereereeretereretrtesterestentseenttretarchereerreettererereeeerrearerntsentes सं

ae सनत्कुमारश्च नारदो भगवानज:। कपिलोऽपान्तरतमो देवलो at आसुरि: uel
मरीचिप्रमुखाश्चान्ये सिद्धेशा: पारदर्शना: । विदाम न ae wel यन्मायां माययाऽऽवृता: 1461
तस्य विश्वेश्वरस्येदं we eed हि न:। तमेव mot याहि हरिस्ते at विधास्यति ice
ad fragt दुर्वासा: ud भगवतो ययौ । वैकुण्ठाख्यं यदध्यास्ते श्रीनिवास: श्रिया सह । ६०॥
आहाच्युतानन्त सदीप्सित प्रभो par माव fe विश्वभावन 1६१॥
अजानता a परमानुभावं कृतं wae waa: प्रियाणाम्।
विधेहि तस्यापचिति विधातर्मुच्चेत यन्नाम्न्युदिते नारकोऽपि ।६२॥

Sri Rudra remarked : "We have no power, 0 dear son, over the infinite (all-pervading)
Supreme, in whom indeed other universes too—as vast as this—forming the body of Jivas
(embodied souls) in the person of Brahma (the birthless creator) appear in thousands at the
appointed time (the time of creation) and (then) cease (merge in Him at the time of final
dissolution)—universes in which we (Brahma and Myself) are being tossed about (like tiny
insects). (56) Myself, the sages Sanatkumara and Narada, the glorious Brahma (the
creator), Lord Kapila, the sages Apantaratama and Devala, Dharma (the god of piety), the
sage Asuri and other omniscient lords of Siddhas (inspired seers) headed by the sage
Marici—we are all unable to penetrate (the veil of) His Maya (deluding potency), enveloped
as we are by that Maya. (57-58) Since this is a weapon of that Lord of the universe and
therefore hard to resist for us, (please) seek Him alone as Your protector. (lam sure) Sri
Hari will bring you security.” (59) Having no hope (of help from any other quarter) left, the sage
Durvasa went from there to the Lord’s (own) realm, called Vaikuntha, in which resides Lord
Visnu (the Abode of Sri) alongwith (His divine Spouse) Sri (the goddess of fortune). (60)
Being scorched by the fire of Sudargana (the missile of Lord Visnu, who is conquered by
none), the sage fell shuddering at the soles of the Lord's feet and said, "O immortal and infinite
Lord, sought for by the righteous, O Protector of the universe, (kindly) do protect me, an
offender (that | am). (61) Anoffence has been committed by me against those beloved of You,
ignorant as | was of Your supreme glory. (Pray,) wipe off that sin, 0 Director (of the universe)!
By the (very utterance of Your Name even a denizen of hell gets liberated." (62)

श्रीभगवानुवाच
अहं भक्तपराधीनो ह्यस्वतन्र इव fan साधुभिर्ग्रस्तहदयो भक्तैर्भक्तजनप्रिय: । ६३॥
नाहमात्मानमाशासे मद्धक्तै: साधुभिर्विना । श्रियं चात्यन्तिकीं ब्रह्मन् येषां गतिरहं परा 1६४॥
ये दारागारपुत्राप्तान् प्राणान् वित्तमिमं परम्। हित्वा मां शरणं याता: कथं तांस्त्यक्तुमुत्सहे । ६५1
मयि निर्बद्धहृदया: साधव: aught: | वशीकुर्वन्ति मां भक्त्या afer: सत्पतिं यथा ।६६॥
मत्सेवया प्रतीतं च सालोक्यादिचतुष्टयम् । नेच्छन्ति सेवया पूर्णा: कुतोऽन्यत् कालविद्रुतम् 1६७1
साधवो eed मह्यं साधूनां wed त्वहम् ।मदन्यत् ते न जानन्ति नाहं तेभ्यो मनागपि 1६८1
उपायं कथयिष्यामि qa fas sy तत्। अयं ह्यात्माभिचारस्ते यतस्तं ag वै war!
साधुषु प्रहितं तेज: प्रहर्तु: कुरुतेऽशिवम् । ६९1
तपो विद्या च विप्राणां नि:श्रेयसकरे sia wa दुर्विनीतस्य कल्पेते कर्तुरन्यथा 1७०॥
ब्रह्मस्तत् गच्छ ME A नाभागतनयं नृपम्।क्षमापय महाभागं तत: जान्तिर्भविष्यति 1७१1
