Dis. 21] “BOOK THREE 229

REPKE ६६3ञ ४.३ KER HER SEAR ERE EER KEKE EERE THRASH SHEA NER EEE HERE IRR AHH
तथा स चाहँ परिवोढुकाम: समानशीलां गृहमेधधेनुम्।
उपेयिवान्मूलमशेषमूलं दुराशय: कामदुघाङ्घ्रिपस्य 1241
प्रजापतेस्ते वचसाधीशा तन्त्या लोक: किलायं कामहतोऽनुबद्ध: |
अहं च लोकानुगतो aay af च हुक्कानिमिषाय तुभ्यम् ।१६॥
लोकांश्च लोकानुगतान् wis fea श्रितास्ते चरणातपत्रम् ।

- परस्परं त्वद्गुणवादसीधुपीयूषनिर्यापितदेहधर्मा: । १७।
न तेऽजराक्षभ्रमिरायुरेषा त्रयोदशारं त्रिशतं षष्टिपर्व ।
षण्नेम्यनन्तच्छदि यत्रिणाभि करालस्रोतो wees madi
gee: पासि पुनर्ग्रसिष्यसे यथोर्णनाभिर्भगवन् स्वरक्तिभि: 1१९1
Aware «oud तवेप्सितॆ यन्मायया नस्तनुषे भूतसूक्ष्मम्।
अनुग्रहायास्त्वपि oa मायया लसत्तुलस्या तनुवा विलक्षित: 1201
The sage said : Ah! the fruit of our eyes has been fully attained today by beholding

You, the repository of all goodness, whose sight, O praiseworthy Lord, is coveted even by

Yogis established in Yoga (deep meditation) after going through higher and still higher

births. (13) Your lotus-feet are a veritable vessel to take one across the ocean of mundane

existence. Only they who have been deprived of their senses by Your Maya (deluding
potency) worship those feet with a view to attaining the trivial and momentary pleasures of
sense, that can be had even in hell. You, however, O Lord, bestow on them such pleasures
of sense too. (14) You area wish-yielding tree, while my heart is impure (tainted by carnality).
Therefore, desirous of marrying a girl of like disposition, that may prove a veritable cow of
plenty (yield all the three objects of human pursuit) in my married life, | too have likewise
sought the shelter of Your feet, which are the source of all blessings. (15) (Constantly)
smitten by desire, this world, O Lord of the universe, is bound (like a beast) by the cord of
the word (Veda) uttered by You, the lord of created beings. Following the ways of the world,
| too, O Embodiment of unalloyed virtue, bear offerings (in the shape of dutiful obedience)
to You, who appear as Time. (16) Turning their back on worldly-minded men as well as on
the (human) beasts (like me) who follow them, Your devotees seek (the protection of) Your
feet, that afford shelter like an umbrella (against the sun of metempsychosis), and meet the
requiremenis of the body (in the shape of hunger, thirst and so on) by drinking the inebriating
nectar of Your praises uttered before one another. (17) Your wheel (in the shape of Time),
which has three navels (in the shape of three divisions of the year, consisting of four months
each) rotates round the axle of the imperishable Brahma; it has thirteen spokes (representing
thirteen months , including the additional month intercalated every third year), three hundred
and sixty joints (corresponding to the same number of days comprised in a year), six rims
(in the shape of the six seasons) and numberless leaves (in the shape of moments) carved
on it. Though cutting short the span of life of the entire creation by its revolution, this wheel
of tremendous velocity cannot touch the life-span of these (Your devotees). (18) O Lord,
though one (without a second), You assume in Yourself the Yogamaya (Your wonderful
creative energy), which is no other than You, with a view to creating the universe, and with
the help of potencies like Sattva etc., (emanating from the said Yogamaya), bring forth and
preserve and will then reabsorb the universe into Yourself, even as the spider spins a
