Dis. 30 } BOOK FOUR 433

REMERON TC We KE MRE EE RT ONT AE RRL -:3-3:302.३.३.३.0.२.0.३.३.३.३.३.३.३..३;३:ॐ;३५.३.३.३.३.३.३.३.३...३.३.७..७.७.७.७.७.७३७.७.७.७.७.&.७७.७.३.७.७.७.३.३
i a EE

Your navel ! Obeisance to You who are adorned with a wreath of lotuses | Obeisance to
You, whose feet resemble a pair of lotuses ! And obeisance to You, O Lord with lotus-like
eyes | (25) Salutations to You, who are clad in stainless robes yellow as the filaments of a
lotus ! (Once more) we offer our obeisance to You, the abode of all creatures as well as their
Seer. (26) To us, who are afflicted (with threefold agonies), You have revealed Your form,
which puts an end to all miseries ! What other favour could be bestowed (on us)? (27) Only
this much should be done by masters who are fond of the poor that they remember the latter
at the opportune moment as their own. O Destroyer of all that is inauspicious; for such
remembrance brings solace to those who are thus remembered. Seated within the heart
even of the most insignificant creatures as their Inner Controller, how could You fail to know
that which is sought by us (Your votaries) hankering after some object ? (28-29) To us, that ,
have won the pleasure of the Lord (Yourself}—who is not only the teacher showing us (the
way to) final beatitude but (our) goal too—that (Your pleasure) alone is the desired boon, O
Lord of the universe ! (30) Yet, O Lord, we do seek one boon from You—who are beyond
(even) Prakrti (the ultimate cause of the world). And indeed there is no limit to Your glories:
that is why You are extolled under the name of Ananta (the Infinite) ! (31) When the celestial
tree of Parijata is easily got, a bee does not resort to another. (Even so) having directly
reached the soles of Your feet, what other things should we seek (from You) ? (32) So long
as we revolve in the whirligig of birth and death under the impulse of our actions, dominated
as we are by Your Maya (deluding potency), let us have in every life the fellowship of Your
loving devotees. (33) We are not prepared to equate with the fellowship of Your loving
devotees, enjoyed even for halfa moment, the delights of paradise nor (even) final beatitude
(freedom from birth and death), much less the blessings sought by mortal men. (34) (For)
in the company of such devotees are sung the delightful stories (of Sri Hari) which slake the
thirst for enjoyment, and we find no enmity with nor fear of any kind for any being. (35) In
their midst is glorified Bhagavan Narayana Himself, the goal of the recluses, through
beautiful stories again and again by men who are free from attachment. (36) How can the
meeting of such devotees of Yours, who go about (from place to place) with the intention of
purifying the sacred places with (the touch of) their feet, not be welcome to him who is afraid
of transmigration ? (37)

वयं तु साक्षाद्भगवन् wan fra we: क्षणसङ्गमेन ।
सुदुश्चिकित्स्यस्य भवस्य मृत्योर्भिषक्तमं are wi गता: स्म । ३८॥
यन्न॰स्वधीतंक्तुंव॰प्रसादिताविप्नाश्चबृन्मश्चसदानुवृस्पा।
आर्या नता: सुहृदो भ्रातरश्च सर्वाणि भूतान्यनसूययैव 1381
यन्र Fy तप wee Feet arene!
wa तदेतत्पुरुषस्य भूम्नो वृणीमहे ते परितोषणाय Xo
Ty: स्वयम्भूर्भगवान् way येऽन्ये तपोज्ञानविशुद्धसत्त्वा: |
अदृष्टपारा अपि यन्महिम्न: स्तुवन्त्यथो त्वाऽऽत्मसमं गृणीम: ।४१॥
नम: समाय Ysa Gr पराय च । वासुदेवाय सत्त्वाय qa भगवते नम: ।४२॥

As for ourselves, O Lord, we have, through a moment's association only with Your
beloved friend, Lord Siva (the Source of this world), found today our refuge directly in You,
the best physician for the malady of birth and death, so very difficult to cure. (88) Whatever
we have properly studied (at the house of our teacher), the efforts we have made to propitiate
our teachers, the Brahmanas and the elders by constantly waiting on them, the salutations

we have offered to (all) worthy men as well as to our kinsmen and brothers, nay, to (all) living
beings in an uncavilling spirit, the austerities duly practised by us in water for a long time
