Dis. 85] BOOK TEN 479

त्क CECE NO LOR eC शाशान्रजा nen eHNheEEnennnen

sages and had himself witnessed Their wondertul exploits. He was thus convinced that They
were no ordinary beings but divine personages. Addressing them with great affection, he
said—(2) "O Krsna, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, O Sankarsana, the Lord
of the greatest Yogis, You both are eternal. | know You are the rulers even of Prakrti and
Purusa (Matter and Spirit), the two direct causes of this universe. (3) You are directly the
substratum and both the instrumental and material cause of the universe. (Nay,) You are its
sole Lords, andithas been broughtinto being for Your sport. Whenever and in whatever form
it exists and whatever You react upon is nothing but You. You are the enjoyable in the form
of Prakrti, and the enjoyer in the form of Purusa, and also the ruler beyond them both. (4)
Lord, You are beyond the senses and beyond birth, existence and other modifications,
having created this diversified universe in Yourself, You have Yourself entered itas its Inner
Controller. Appearing as Prana (active force) and as Jiva (cognitive force), it is You who
sustain and nourish it. (5) The potency possessed by the Prana and other forces responsible
for the creation of the universe is (in fact) Your potency; for (unlike You) they are material and
not spiritual in essence, and are also dependent on You. The activity which they exhibit is
only apparent (the motive power behind them is Yours). (6) (O Lord,) the lustre of the moon,
the glow of fire, the effulgence of the sun, the twinkling of stars and the flash of lightning, the
firmness of mountains, the odour and sustaining power of the earth—all these are, in fact,
You. (7) O Lord, the slaking, life-giving and purifying property of water, are You. You are
water itself as well as its taste. The vigour of the senses, mental energy and bodily strength,
the activity of the body and its locomotion (—all these), though attributed to the wind, (really)
proceed from You. (8) The cardinal points and the space denoted by them are You. Ether
and its principle sound, i. e., speech in its subtlest form known by the name of Para, and its
other forms, viz., Pasyanti, Madhyama as well as Vaikhari (articulate speech), consisting of
letter-sounds and words denoting several objects are nothing but You. (9) The power to
reveal objects inhering in the senses, the deities presiding over them and the power by which
they do so are indeed You. The determining faculty of the intellect and the power of duly
connecting various experiences, inhering in the Jiva, are You. (10) In the elements You
inhere as their cause, the Tamasa aspect of Ahankara (Ego); inthe senses You exist as their
cause, the Taijasa (Rajasa) aspect of Aharikara: in the deities presiding over senses as well
as in the mind You exist as their cause, the Vaikarika (Sattvika) aspect of Ahankara; and You
are Maya, the cause of the repeated birth of Jivas, bound to Karma. (11) (Just) as in the
(various) modifications of a substance the original substance is observed to be the abiding
factor, so You are the imperishable truth behind all these perishable objects. (12) (O Lord !)
the three modes of Prakrti—viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—and what are known as their
modifications (the Mahat-Tattva etc.) are, in fact, assumed in You, the transcendent Brahma,
through Your wonderful Yogic power. (13) Therefore, these modifications (viz., birth,
existence, growth, etc.), donotexistin You. When they are projected on You, (then only) they
appear in You, who appear as permeating them. At other times, however, (when they cease
to be so projected, e.g., during deep sleep), You remain in Your absolute state (unconnected
with these modifications).(14) This universe is but a (continuous) flow of the three Gunas.
They who fail to perceive the subtle presence in it of Your absolute state as the All-Soul get
entangled in (the meshes of) Karma (due to their identification with the body) and (have to)
undergo repeated births and deaths in this world. (15) O Lord, providentially | have attained
in this land (of Bharatavarga) the rare gift of a human body, endowed with vigorous senses
and organs, and yet under the influence of Your Maya (enchanting power) my life-time has
been fritterec away in (utter) neglect of the (main) purpose of my existence. (16) (O Lord!)
You have bound the whole of this universe with ties of affection having their roots in self-
