266 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28

AREA SHAH व न्वि AERA LEU RECECREET HEPES OKT EE OER EEE HKET ER ESE eee eee hee
सोऽप्येतया चरमया मनसो fawn तस्मिन्महिग्न्यवसित: सुखदु:खबाह्ये ।
हेतुत्वमप्यसति कर्तरि दु:खयोर्यत् स्वात्मन् विधत्त उपलब्धपरात्मकाष्ठ: ।३६॥
देहं च तं न चरम: स्थितमुत्थितं वा सिद्धो विप्यति यतोऽध्यगमत्स्वरूपम् |
दैवादुपेतमथ दैववशादपेतं art यथा परिकृतं मदिरामदान्ध: ise!
देहोऽपि दॆववशग: Ge कर्म यावत् स्वारम्भकं प्रतिसमीक्षत wa सासु: ।
तं सप्रपञ्चमधिरूढसमाधियोग: wet पुनर्न waa प्रतिबुद्धवस्तु: । ३८॥

By following the above course of meditation the devotee develops love for Sri.Hari: his
heart melts through Devotion, the hair on his body stand erect through excessive joy and he
is constantly bathedina stream of tears occasioned by intense love, so that he now gradually
withdraws (from the object of meditation) even the mind, which was (till now) being used by
him as a means to attract Sri Hari (just as a hook is used for capturing fish). (84) Even as
the flame of a lamp is extinguished (i.e., Becomes one with its cause, viz., the element of fire)
when the oil etc., are burnt and the lamp broken, so the mind gets immediately dissolved
(becomes one with Brahma or the Absolute) the moment it is cut off from its moorings in the
shape of the soul and, rid of passion, it ceases to think of anything. The adjuncts of the soul
in the shape of body etc. (which are nothing but a continuous flow of the Gunas or modes
of Prakrti), being withdrawn at this stage, the striver sees pervading everywhere the one
Absolute having no distinction of subject, object and so on. (35) Having established himself
in the glory of his own being (viz., Brahma)—which transcends joy and sorrow—through the
dissolution of his mind, brought about by the practice of Yoga and divorced from ignorance,
the striver realizes the truth of the Supreme Self, and discovers that pleasure and pain as
well as their experience, which he attributed till now to his own self, are attributable to the
ego, which is a product of ignorance.(36) Even as a man blinded by intoxication caused by
spirituous liquor sees not whether the cloth wrapped round his loins is still there or has
dropped therefrom, so the enlightened soul who has attained this final stage no longer
discerns whether the body (which they still call his own) is seated or has risen from its seat,
whether it has shifted (from the place where it was) by the will of Providence or whether it
has come back (to that place) by the will of the same Providence; for he has realized his
essential character. (37) The body too, which is (now) subject to the will of Providence,
survives along with the senses till the destiny which contributed to its existence has not been
reaped. Yet the enlightened soul who has attained to the heights of Yoga culminating in
Samadhi (abstract meditation) and (consequently) realized the truth no longer regards that
body or those connected with it (e.g., wife, children and so on) as his own, even as a man
who is awake no longer thinks of the body etc. —seen in a dream—as his own.(38)

यथा पुत्राच्च वित्ताच्च पृथङ्मर्त्य: प्रतीयते। अप्यात्पत्वेनाभिमताद्देहादे: पुरुषस्तथा 13 |
यथोल्मुकाद्बिस्फुलिङ्गाद्धूमाद्वापि स्वसम्भवात्। अप्यात्मत्वेनाभिमताद्यथाम्नि: पृथगुल्मुकात् ।४०॥
भूतेन्द्रियान्त: करणात्प्रधानाज्जीवसंज्ञितात्। STAT TAT पृथग्डरष्टा भगवान् ब्रह्मसंज्ञित: ।४१॥
wayyy ome सर्वभूतानि चात्मनि । ईक्षेतानन्यभावेन yaya तदात्मताम् ।४२॥
स्वयोनिषु यथा ज्योतिरेके नाना प्रतीयते | चोनीनां गुणवैषम्यात्तथाऽऽत्मा प्रकृतौ स्थित: ।४३॥
तस्मादिमां स्वां प्रकृतिं दैवीं सदसदात्मिकाम्। दुर्विभाव्यां पराभाव्य स्वरूपेणावतिष्ठते ।४४॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां तृतीयस्कन्धे कापिलेये साधनानुष्ठानं
नामाष्टाविशोऽध्याव: ।२८॥

Just as a man is realized (on a little thought) as distinct from his son and possessions,
