682° SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

RAS र्ही EEA HEE EYER HHCY HK यक के ककक कककजा कज् EK CSE RESC CERES क्त इ HEHE AER AHHH HH

O king, nay, of other powerful beings (too). It is He by whom (all) these (creatures), (both)
high and low, animate and inanimate, commencing from Brahma (the creator), have been
held under sway. (8) He is the (supreme) Ruler; He, the mighty Kala (Time-Spirit) and the
(very) embodiment of organic and mental powers, physical strength and fortitude. The
supreme Controller of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), itis He alone who creates, protects
and devours (dissolves) the universe by means of His potencies (in the form of Rajas, Sattva
and Tamas). (9) Abandon you this demoniac disposition of yours and keep your mind
equipoised. There are no enemies other than an unsubdued and errant mind. For that (viz.,
maintaining the poise of the mind) constitutes the eminent and correct procedure of
worshipping the Infinite. (10) Some regard the four quarters, the four intermediate points, the
sky overhead and the subterranean regions below as conquered by themselves, without first
having curbed the six marauding thieves (in the shape of the five senses of perception and
the mind). (Indeed) whence can there be enemies, born of one's own ignorance, in the eye
of the knowing and pious soul who has conquered his mind andis (thus) alike to all embodied

beings ? (11)
व्यक्तं त्वं मर्तुकामोऽसि योऽतिमात्रं विकत्थसे qagot fe मन्दात्मन् ननु Eagar fire: 1221
यस्त्वया मन्दभाग्योक्तो मदन्यो जगदीश्वर: | avai ale स सर्वत्र कस्मात् स्तम्भे न दृश्यते 1231
as विकत्थमानस्य fir: कायाद्धरामि ते । गोपायेत हरिस्त्वाद्य यस्ते झारणमीप्सितम् । १४
wa s f +- ad त . 1
खड्गं प्रगृह्योत्पतितो वरासनात् wet तताडातिबल: स्वमुष्टिना । १५।
यं वै स्वधिष्ण्योपगतं त्वजादय: श्रुत्वा स्वधामाप्ययमङ्ग मेनिरे ।१६॥
a विक्रमन् पुत्रवधेप्सुरोजसा निशम्य निर्हादमपूर्वमद्भुतम् ।
अन्त:सभायां न wet aad वित्त्रसुर्येन सुरारियूथपा: ।१७॥
Hiranyakasipu replied : "Evidently you are keen to die, now that you are bragging too
much. For the words of those who are anxious to die, O slow-witted one, are sure to be
incoherent. (12) Where is that Lordof the universe other than me, that has (just) been
mentioned by you, O wretched one? Ifit is urged that he is (present) everywhere, wherefore
is he not seen in the pillar (over there)? (13) | being all-in-all, here do | sever your head from
your trunk, a braggart that you are. Let Hari, whois the asylum sought for by you, protect you
today." (14) Thus tormenting again and again his son (Prahrada), that eminent devotee of
the Lord, with abusive words (uttered) in anger, the great and mighty demon (Hiranyakasipu)
sprang from his exalted seat, taking his sword, and knocked the pillar with his fist. (15) That
very moment there rose in that pillar a most terrific crash, as a result of which the shell of the
cosmic egg cracked (as it were) and on hearing which, as it reached the spheres of Brahma
(the creator) and others, they for their part actually suspected the dissolution of their very
abodes, O dear Yudhisthira ! (16) Displaying his valour in his anxiety to get rid of his son
(Prahrada), he heard that unprecedented and weird sound; but he did not descry inside the
court the source of that sound, due to which the leaders of the Asuras (the enemies of the
gods) had got frightened. (17)

अदृश्यतात्यद्भुतरूपमुद्दहन् स्तम्भे सभायां न WT न मानुषम् । १८॥
