Dis. 87 ] BOOK TEN 491

PRCT SE DEE EERO ENA CATED TOL Ae KeTeTeRT ens eKsransenesrenens ए न 9 ४७११ ४४७

There (in that assembly) arose the same question which you have (just) put to me. (10)
Though equal in point of learning, askesis (self-abnegation) and practice of virtue, and
although friends, foes and neutrals were alike to them, they treated one (of themselves, viz.,
Sanandana) as an expounder (of truths),while the rest remained inclined to listen. (11)

सनन्दन उवाच
स्वसृष्टमिदमापीय War सह दाक्तिभि: । तदन्ते बोधयाञ्चक्रुस्तल्लिङ्गै: श्रुतय: TAR?
यथा Fad सम्राजं वन्दिनस्तत्पराक्रमै: । प्रत्यूषेऽभ्येत्य सुङ्लोकैर्बोधयन्त्यनुजीविन: 1231

Sanandana said : At the end of Pralaya (the period of Dissolution of the universe) the
deities presiding over the Sruti texts (and sprung up from His very first breath) awakened
the Supreme, who had been lying asleep (as it were all the time) alongwith His (innumerable)
potencies (Prakrti, Purusa, Time and so on), having swallowed this universe evolved by
Himself—through (the following) hymns indicating His true character in the same way as
bards depending for their subsistence on an emperor call on him, while he is (still) asleep,
at daybreak and awaken him with songs of praise celebrating his exploits that contribute to
his excellent fame. (12-13)

श्रुतय ऊचु:
wa wa जह्यजामजित दोषगृभीतगुणां त्वमसि यदात्पना समवरुद्धसमस्तभग: |
अगजगदोकसामखिलशाक्त्यवबोधक ते क्कचिदजयाऽऽत्पना च चरतोऽनुचरेन्निगम: । १४।

बृहदुपलब्धमेतदवयन्त्यव्रेषतया यत उदयास्तमयौ विकृतेर्मृदि वाविकृतात् ।
अत ऋषयो दधुस्त्वयि मनोवचनाचरितं कथमयथा भवन्ति भुवि दत्तपदानि नॄणाम् । १५॥

The Srutis prayed ; Manifest Your glory, reveal Your exalted nature, O unconquered
Lord | Root out the nescience, which has no beginning, of (all) the Jivas invested with an
immobile or mobile body—nescience which has assumed the (three) Gunas (Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas) for an evil purpose (viz., obscuring the blissful nature of the Jivas and there by
throwing them into bondage), possessedas Youare of all divine attributes by virtue cf Your
own essential nature, O Awakener of all the powers in those souls | The Veda is able to
describe You (only) when during the period of creation You sport in conjunction with Your
Maya (beginningless divine energy) or exist in Your absolute state. (14) The wise
recognize this known (seen and heard of) universe,to be (no other than) Brahma (Yourself),
because it is Brahma (alone) that remains (when all else is dissolved) and because it is
from and into Brahma (the material cause)— which remains unchanged—that the universe
(Its evolute) emanates and returns (even) as the earthenware are evolved out of and
disappear into clay. Hence (because of Its being the material Cause of and, therefore,
comprising the entire universe) the Vedic texts have concluded as referring to You
whatever is contemplated with the mind (that is, the import of words,) and uttered with the
tongue (viz, the names). How could the feet of men placed anywhere (on earth) be
regarded as not placed on the earth (itself) ? (15)

इति तव सूरयस्त्यधिपतेऽखिललोकमलक्षपणकथामृताब्धिमवगाह्य तपांसि Ae: ।
किमुत पुन: स्वधामविधुताशायकालगुणा: परम भजन्ति ये पदमजस्रसुखानुभवम् । १६1
qa इव श्वसन्त्यसुभृतो यदि तेऽनुविधा महदहमादयोऽण्डमसृजन् यदनुग्रहत: |
पुरुषविधोऽन्वयोऽत्र चरमोऽन्नमयादिषु a: सदसत: परं त्वमथ यदेष्नवहोषमृतम् । १७॥

Therefore, O Lord of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), the wise have taken a plunge
into the ocean of nectar in the shape of Your stories—that wash away the impurities of all
