46 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11
VATA

Bett SR RoR Re Rt ett RR AAR AR RERER EEE नप्ते HEE EASE RE AEE RE HEE

accepted the throne (of Ayodhya) and like a father protected the peopie (of His kingdom),
who were (all) devoted to their respective duties and endued with the characteristics of their
(own) Varna (grade in society) and Agrama (stage in life); while they (in their turn) recognized
Himas their father. (51) So!ong as Sri Rama—who knew whatis right and brought happiness
to ail created beings—reigned as king, time was like Krtayuga (Satyayuga, the first Yuga)
though (actually) Treta (the second Yuga) prevailed. (52) Forests, rivers, mountains, Varsas
(subdivisions of a Dwipa), Dwipas (principal divisions of the globe) and oceans, all yielded
the desired objects of the people, O chief of the Bharatas! (53) While Sri Rama—who is the
same as Lord Visnu—ruled as king, mental and bodily ailments, old age, self-disparage-
ment, sorrow, grief, fear and fatigue were non-existent. (Nay,) death too did not overtake the
unwilling. (54) (Strictly) observing the vow of having (only) one wife (throughout His life) and
conducting Himself like a sage even though a king, the pious Lord Himself (scrupulously)
performed His household duties (just) in order to give a lesson (to the world).-(55) By Her
affection, obedience, amiables disposition, intelligence and bashfulness, Sita, who was not
only virtuous but meek through humility and knew His intention, captivated the mind of Her
(divine) Spouse. (56)

Thus ends the tenth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Sri Rama,
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramaharhsa-Samhita.

SERS:
Peri

अथैकादशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XI

The other pastimes of Sri Rama
श्रीग्युक उवाच

भगवानात्मनाऽऽत्मानं राम उत्तमकल्पकै: । सर्वदेवमयं देवमीज आचार्यवान् मखै: । १ ।

हौत्रेफ्यादिज्ञंप्राचींब्रह्मणेदक्षिणांप्नभु:।अध्वर्यवेप्रतौचींचउदीचींप्ताफाग्र्यस:।र।

आचार्याय ददौ Sei यावती भूस्तदन्तरा । मन्यमान इदं Heel ब्राह्मणोऽर्हति नि:स्पृह: । ३ ।

इत्ययं तदलङ्कारवासोभ्यामवदेषित: । तथा राज्ञ्यपि वैदेही Pragati । ४ ।

ते तु ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य वात्सल्यं वीक्ष्य संस्तुतम्। sie: क्लिन्नधियस्तस्मै sae लभाषिरे । ५ ।

अप्रत्तं नस्त्वया किं नु भगवन् भुवनेश्वर । यन्नोऽन्तर्हदयं fara तमो दंसि स्वरोचिषा । ६ |

नमो ब्रह्मण्यदेवाय रामायाकुण्ठमेधसे। उत्तमश्लोकधुर्याय न्यस्तदण्डार्पिताङ्घ्रये । |
Sri Suka resumed: Guided by His preceptor (the sage Vasistha), the divine Sri Rama
Himself propitiated—by means of sacrificial performances conducted with excellent
material—His own Self in the form of Lord Visnu, representing all the gods on His person.(1)
(Atthe conclusion of the sacrifices) the Lord gave away (by way of sacrificial fees) the eastern
quarter to the Hota, the southem quarter to the Brahma, the western quarter to the Adhwaryu
and the northern quarter to the Udgata (the chanter of Samaveda). (2) To His preceptor He
gave away the entire land that remained at the centre, recognizing (as He did) that the

Brahmana (alone) was entitled to the whole of this earth, Himself being free from (all)
craving.(3) In this way Sri Rama (who had given away His valuables and cash too) was left
