Dis. 11], ^`*“ BOOK ONE" ` 43
Sonn trate a SR ३ CRO teat oR SIO ton BOE Si tot to Ar tr i Roti war tt eg BRR a BOR HE ROR HE ROR ON HORROR ROR RC RRO
and there. (13) Its highways, streets, bazars and quadrangles had been thoroughly cleaned
and sprinkled with scented water and were strewn with fruits, flowers, unbroken rice and
sprouts (that had been rained on the Lord as something auspicious). (14) The entrance of
every house in the city was adorned with curds, unbroken rice, fruits andsugar-cane, pitchers
full of water, offering, incense and lights. (15)

निशम्य प्रेष्ठमायान्ते वसुदेवो महामना: | अक्रूरश्चोग्रसेनश्च रामश्चाद्भुतविक्रम: 125 |

प्रद्युम्नश्चारुदेष्णश्च साम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत: | प्रहर्षवेगोच्छहशितरायनासनभोजना: । १७॥

प्रत्युज्गग्मू TEM: प्रणयागतसाध्वसा: । १८॥

वारमुख्याश्च Baal याम्यास्तद्दर्शनोत्युका | लसत्कुण्डलनिर्भातकपोलवदनश्रिय: । १९1

नटनर्तकगन्धर्वा: सूतमागधवन्दिन: । गायन्ति चोत्तमश्लोकचरितान्यद्भुतानि च । २०।

भगवांस्तत्र बन्धूनां पोराणामनुवर्तिनाम्। यथाविध्युपसंगम्य सर्वेषां मानमादधे 1221

प्रह्लाभिवादनाद्लेषकरस्पर्शस्मितेक्षणै: । आश्वास्य चाश्वपाकेभ्यो वरैश्चाभिमतैर्बिभु: 122 |

wa च गुरुभिर्विप्रै: सदारै: स्थविरैरपि । आशीर्भिर्युज्यमानोऽन्यैर्वन्दिभिश्चाविशत्पुरम् 1231
tne noble-minded Vasudeva (Sri Krsna's father) and Akrura (Vasudeva's cousin) and
king Ugrasena (Sri Krsna's maternal granduncle) and Sri Rama (Balarama, Sri Krsna's elder
brother) of marvellous prowess, and Pradyumna and Carudesna (Rukmini's sons) and
Samba, Jambavati'’s son, in transport of joy, quitted their beds and seats and even meals on
hearing of the return of their most beloved Sri Krsna. (16-17) Excited with emotion and full
of joy and esteem, they placed a lordly elephant at their head (to serve as a good omen); and
accompanied with Brahmanas reciting benedictory hymns and equipped with articles of
good omen, they mounted their chariots and sallied forth to meet the Lord, amidst the blast
of conchs and trumpets and the chanting of Vedic hymns. (18) The chief among the
courtezans, whose faces looked very charming with their cheeks irradiated by splendid ear-
rings, proceeded in their hundreds in palanquins, eager to have a look at Him. (19) Evenso
actors, dancers and songsters as well as panegyrists, bards and minstrels glorified the
wonderful exploits of the Lord of excellent renown. (20) The Lord on that occasion met His
kinsmen and attendants as well as the citizens in the appropriate manner and showed His
consideration to all. (21) Gratifying them all down to the pariah by bowing down His head,
greeting in respectful terms, clasping to the bosom, pressing the hand of and greeting with
smiles and endearing looks, and granting them boons of their choice, and Himself blessed
by His elders, the Brahmanas and their wives, the aged folk and others, including the
panegyrists, the almighty Lord entered the city. (22-23)

राजमार्गं गते कृष्णे द्वारकाया: कुलस्तिय: | watvarengds तदीक्षणमहोत्सवा: । 2% |
fet निरीक्षमाणानां यदपि द्वारकौकसाम्। न वितृप्यन्ति fe दृश: श्रियोधामाङ्गमच्युतम् । २५॥
fret निवासो यस्योर: पानपात्रं मुखं दृशाम्। बाहवो लोकपालानां सारङ्गाणां पदाम्नुजम् । २६॥
सितातपत्रव्यजनैरुपस्कृत: प्रसूनवर्षैरभिवर्षित: पथि ।
पिशङ्खवासा वनमालया बभौ घनो यथार्कोडुपचापवैद्युतै: । २७॥

As Sri Krsna was passing along the main road, the women of respectful families of
Dwaraka went up to the top of their mansions, O Saunaka, to enjoy the grand feast of His
sight. (24) The bosom of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna) is the abode of Sri (the goddess of
prosperity); His countenance, a cup of nectar for all eyes to drink from; His arms, the habitat
of the guardians of the different worlds (who ever reside in them); His lotus-like feet, the home
