Dis. 62 ] BOOK TEN 383 -

Siti Minne rreeerngnterereeesensenrense eect eres res ioe eee nin

कण्डूरत्या निभृतैर्दोर्भिर्युयुत्सुर्दिग्गजानहम् । आद्यायां चूर्णयन्नद्रीन् भीतास्तेऽपि प्रदुद्गुवु: । ९ ।
तच्छुत्वाफावान्ङ्कृ:वेत्तुस्तेभज्यतेयदा।त्वद्दर्पघ्नं way संयुगं मत्समेन ते ।१०॥
इत्युक्त कुमतिर्हृष्ट:ऽ स्वगृहं प्राविशन्नृप । प्रतीक्षन् गिरिशादेशं स्ववीर्यनरानं कुधी: 1221

Touching His lotus-feet with his crown shining like the sun, Bana, intoxicated as he was
with the pride of his prowess, spoke one day to the Lord of Kailasa, who was standing beside
him, (as follows:—) (6) "I bow to You, the Preceptor and Ruler of all the worlds, the celestial
tree which grants the desires of men whose longings have not been sated, O supreme
Deity!(7) The thousand arms given by You (by way of a boon) have only proved a burden to
me (so far); (for) in (all) the three worlds | do not find a well-matched rival other than You. (8)
Eager to fight, | proceeded, O most ancient Person, against the elephants guarding the
quarters, pounding the mountains (even as | marched) with my arms full of itching (for a
combat); but they too took speedily to their heels in terror." (9) The Lord flew into a rage to
hear that and said, "When your ensign is broken, your encounter will take place with one
equal to Me; that will crush your pride, O foolish one !" (10) Thus spoken to, the fool with a
perverted mind withdrew to his palace, full of joy, O king, awaiting the fulfilment of the augury
of Lord Siva (the Lord of Kailasa), even though it was expected to deal a crushing blow to
his power. (11)

तस्योषा नाम दुहिता स्वप्ने प्राद्युम्निना रतिम्। कन्यालभत कान्तेन प्रागदृष्टश्रुतेन सा 1१२1
सा तत्र तमपङ्यन्ती क्वासि कान्तेति वादिनी । सखीनां मध्य उत्तस्थौ विह्वला व्रीडिता gary ।१३॥
ara wait कुम्भाण्डश्चित्रलेखा च ART सख्यपृच्छत् सखीमूषां कोतूहलसमन्विता ।१४॥
के त्वे मृगयसे gy Sere cares न तेऽद्यापि राजपुत्रुपलक्षये ।१५॥

Evenas a virgin, his daughter, Usa by name, enjoyed in a dream sexual delight with the
lovely son of Pradyumna (viz., Aniruddha), who had (however) neither been seen nor heard
of (by her) before. (12) Not finding him there (on opening her eyes), she got up in a state of
excitement saying, “Where are you, my darling!" in the midst of her girl companions, and felt
greatly abashed. (13) Kumbhanda was the minister of Bana and Citralekha, his daughter.
Full of curiosity she, a (constant) companion of Usa, questioned her friend (thus):—(14) O
princess of charming eyebrows ! whom are you looking for and what is the nature of your
longing ? | do not find till today anyone who has espoused you. (15)

ऊषोवाच
a: कश्चिन्नर: स्वप्ने fam: कमललोचन:। पीतवासा बृहद्वाहुर्योषितां हृदयङ्गम: 1१६1
ae मृगये sR पाययित्वाधरं मधु । क्वापि यात: स्पृहयतीं क्षिप्त्वा मां वृजिनार्णवे । १७।

Usa replied : In my dream was seen a certain youngman of dark-brown hue, with long
arms and lotus-like eyes, clad in yellow and captivating the heart of women. (16) | am in quest
of that darling, who having allowed me to drink the honey of his lips, has gone to some
unknown destination, plunging me, though thirsting (yet), into an ocean of misery. (17)
