Dis. 10] »' © BOOK ONE 37

Se Re Be Oe PB RR RO RH RR BERT R RRR HR RR BERR ERO RON a at Hh BB PR RR RRR RR eR eee HRY

am युधिष्ठिरो गत्वा सहकृष्णो गजाह्वयम् । पितरं सान्त्वयामास गान्धारीं च तपस्विनीम् xc
पित्रा चानुमतो राजा वासुदेवानुमोदित:। चकार we धर्मेण पितृपैतामहं fay: ।४९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे युधिष्ठिरराज्यप्रलम्भो नाम नवमोऽध्याय: ।९॥

ऽप्रांव went on: Having thus merged his soul with all the activities of his mind, speech
and the visual sense in Sri Krsna, the universal Soul, Bhisma expired, his breath being
dissolved into the atmospheric air. (43) Perceiving that Bhisma had entered into the one
indivisible Brahma, all those present there became silent even as birds do at the close of
day. (44) Then sounded kettledrums beaten by the gods and human beings; the pious
among the princes shouted applause and showers of flowers poured from heaven. (45)
Having had the funeral and other rites performed in respect of the deceased, O Saunaka
(descendant of Bhrgu), Yudhisthira was plunged in sorrow for some time. (46) The sages
(who had assembled there) extolled Sri Krsna with great delight, uttering His secret names;
and then, with Sri Krsna in their heart, they returned each to his own hermitage. (47)
Thereafter Yudhisthira, accompanied by Sti Krsna, returned to Hastinapura and comforted
his uncle (Dhrtarastra) as well as his aunt (Gandhari), who was known for her austerity.*(48)
Then, permitted by his uncle and with the approval of Sri Krsna (the son of Vasudeva), the
king ruled over his ancestral kingdom with righteousness. (49)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled “Recovery of the throne by Yudhisthira,"
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

POISE Sey

अथ दशमोऽध्याय:
Discourse X
Sri Krsna's Departure to Dwaraka
TH उवाच
wa स्वरिक्थस्पृधं आततायिनो युधिष्ठिरो धर्मभृतां वरिष्ठ: ।
wey: प्रत्यवरुद्धभोजन: ai प्रवृत्तत किमकारषीत्तत: । १ ।

Saunaka said: Having got rid of the ruffians who sought to rob him of his lawful! heritage,
how did Yudhisthira, the foremost of pious rulers, proceed (to rule his kingdom) with his
younger brothers and what did he accomplish later, averse as he was to the gratification of

his senses ? (1)
Yd उवाच

निवेशायित्वा निजराज्य gat gfe प्रीतमना aya ह । २ ।

Fara भीष्मोक्तमथाच्युतोक्तं प्रवृत्तविज्ञानविधूतवबिभ्रम: |

शशास गामिन्द्र gansta: परिध्युपान्तामनुजानुवर्तित: । ३ |
कामं aad पर्जन्य: सर्वकामदुघा मही । सिषिचु: स्म व्रजान् गाव: पयसोधस्वतीर्मुदा । ४ |

* Out of sympathy for her blind husband Gandhari kept her eyes blindfolded till her death ever since her marriage, an
instance of wifely devotion which has no parallel in human history.

