546 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26

KHAO EEE TAAL HELEN HCHO E OER CCEEKC EOS CE ECE LEK ALTERAC ETH HETEAK ELE HATHA He

Again, those in charge of the infernal region (the officers of Yama) put to (great) torture
and (then) hack to pieces in the other world those hypocrites who actually slaughter animals
here in sacrifices performed for mere show (to deceive others), when they fall into the infernal
region called Vaisasa (ViSasana). (25) Again, they throw into a river of semen (the hell known
by the name of Lalabhaksa), in the other world, that sinful Dwija (a member of the twice-
born classes) who, blinded by passion, actually causes his wife, belonging to the same caste
(as his own), to drink (his) semen here, and make her drink his fill of that semen. (26) Again,
seven hundred and twenty hounds with adamantine teeth, which are no other than the
messengers of Yama (representing the three hundred and sixty days and the same number
of nights constituting a year), indeed veraciously munch in the other world in (the hell called)
Sarameyadana, those robbers, kings or soldiers ofa king's army who, resorting to arson and
poisoning actually loot here villages and companies of merchants travelling together. (27)
He, again, who actually tells a lie here while giving evidence (in a law-suit), in bartering
(buying and selling) goods or while making a gift, on any account whatsoever, is hurled
headlong after death from a (steep) mountain-top, a hundred Yojanas high, in the hell called
Avicimat, where there is no support to stand upon (because of the steep nature of the
mountain) and where land witha rocky surface appears like water; hence the name ‘Avicimat'
(having no water” ). There the man does not die even though his body continues to be
shattered to minute particles, and falls down the moment he is lifted up (to the mountain-top)
again. (28)

यस्त्विह वै fact राजन्यो वैश्यो वा सोमपीथस्तत्कलत्रं वा सुरां व्रतस्थोऽपि वा पिबति प्रमादतस्तेषां
निरयं नीतानामुरसि पदाऽऽक्रम्यास्ये वह्निना द्रवमाणं कारष्णायसं निषिञ्चन्ति। २९ | अथ च यस्त्विह वा
आत्मसम्भावनेन स्वयमधमो जन्मतपोविद्याचारवर्णाश्रमवतो वरीयसो न बहु मन्येत स मृतक Ua मृत्वा
क्षारकर्दमे निरयेऽवाक्शिरा निपातितो दुरन्ता यातना ह्यश्नुते । ३०

Again, if a Brahmana (a member of the priestly class) or his wife or (for that matter)
anyone observing a sacred vow actually drinks wine here due to perversity or if a Ksatriya
(one belonging to the ruling or warrior class) or Vaisya (one belonging to the trading and
agricultural classes) drinks the extract of the Soma plant, the servants of Yama pour iron
melted with fire into their mouth when they are taken (after death) to the infernal region (called
Ayahpana), pressing their bosom with their foot. (29) And further he, for one who, (though)
himself belonging to the lowest strata of society, indeed refuses through self-esteem to
respect here his superiors in pedigree, austerity, learning, pious conduct, Varna (grade in
society) and ASrama (stage in life) is as good as dead (through actually living) and indeed
suffers in terminable tortures when thrown, head foremost, after death into the hell called
Ksarakardama. (30)

ये fae वै gem: पुरुषमेधेन यजन्ते याश्च स्नियो नृपशून् Greta तांश्च ते पशव्र sa निहता
यमसदने यातयन्तो रक्षोगणा: सौनिका इव स्वधितिनावरदायासृक् पिबन्ति नृत्यन्ति च गायन्ति च हुष्यमाणा
ade पुरुषादा: । ३१ । ये fag वा अनागसोऽरण्ये ग्रामे वा वैश्रम्भकैरुपसृतानुपविश्रम्भव्य जिजीविषून्
शूलसूत्रादिषूपप्रोतान् क्रीडनकतया यातयन्ति तेऽपि च प्रेत्य यमयातनासु शूलादिषु प्रोतात्मान: क्षुत्तृड्भ्यां
चाभिहता: कङ्कवटादिभिश्चेतस्ततस्तिरमतुण्डैराहन्यमाना आत्मशमलं स्मरन्ति। ३२॥

As regards men who propitiate Goddess Bhadrakall, the god Bhairava and other deities
here by actually sacrificing human beings to them and women who eat (the meat of) such
human victims, the men (thus) slaughtered like beasts are reborn as torturing agents in the

* A sheet of water with a ruffled surface is called 'Vicimat' (having waves or ripples). Therefore, 'Avicimat’ means a place
where there is no such sheet of water actually present but which only appears to have such a sheet of water.
