38 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

१२२२ २२२२ EEA AAR २१११ AREHSEREEMA SHA SS Hee ERR eET व दे त ७७ र्त ट त्त

foremost of Brahmana sages, deserve death, O lord knowing what is right, at the hands of
the foremost of royal sages in you, any more than a son at the hands ofhis father ? (30) How
can you, esteemed of the righteous, approve of the death (at your own hands) of this pious
and sinless Brahmana, an expositor of the Vedas even when unborn, any more than you
would the slaughter of a cow? (31) If (in spite of my protests) this Brahmana—without home
Ishall not survive even for a moment—is to be made a victim by you, then first devour me,
as good as dead." (32) In spite of her pleading pitifully in this way and crying like a helpless
woman, King Saudasa, who was deluded by the curse (of his preceptor, the sage Vasistha)
devourd the Brahmana even asa tiger would devour a beast. (33) Finding her husband (lit.,
impregnator) eaten up by Saudasa (who behaved like an ogre), and lamenting herself, the
chaste Brahmana woman, full of anger, cursed the king (in the following words):—(34)"Since
my husband, O wicked soul, has been devoured by you while | was stricken with love, your
death too, O foolish one, will be shown by me to follow from sexual intercourse." (35) Having
cursed King Mitrasaha in the aforesaid words and consigning his husband's bones to a
flaming fire, the lady—who looked upon the world of her husband (the region to which the
soul of her husband had gone) as her ultimate destination—followed the course of her
husband (burnt herself to death). (36)

विशापो द्वादशाब्दान्ते मैथुनाय समुद्यत: । विज्ञाव ब्राह्मणीशापं महिष्या स निवारित: ।३७॥
तत ऊर्ध्व स तत्याज स्रीसुखं कर्मणाप्रजा: । वसिष्ठस्तदनुज्ञातो मदयन्त्यां प्रजामधात् । ३८॥
सा वै सप्त समा गर्भमविभ्रन्न व्यजायत। जघ्नेऽऽमनोदरं तस्या: सोऽर्मकस्तेन कथ्यते । ३९॥
अङ्मकान्मूलको जज्ञे a: स्रीभि: परिरक्षित: । नारीकवच gat fad मूलकोऽभवत् ives
ततो Gee, पुत्र ऐडविडस्तत: । राजा विश्वसहो यस्य खदवाङ्गश्चक्रवर्त्यभूत् ।४१॥
यो देवैरर्थितो दैत्यानवधीद् ght दुर्जय: । मुहूर्तमायुरज्ञात्वैत्य mat संदे मन: ।४२॥
न मे ब्रह्मकुलात् प्राणा: कुलदैवान्न चात्मजा: । न श्रियो न मही राज्यं न दाराश्चातिवल्लभा: । ४३१
न बाल्येऽपि मतिर्मह्यमधर्मे wa क्वचित्। नापद्यमुत्तमर्लोकादन्यत् किञ्चन वस्त्वहम् । ४४॥
देवै: कामवरो दत्तो मह्यं त्रिभुवनेश्वैरै। न वृणे तमहं कामं भूतभावनभावन: ।४५॥
ये विक्षिप्तेन्द्यधियो देवास्ते weft स्थितम्। न विन्दन्ति प्रियं शश्वदात्मानं किमुतापरे ।४६॥
अथेशमायारचितेषु सङ्घं Ty रन्धर्वपुरोपमेषु ।
रूढं प्रकृत्याऽत्मनि विश्वकर्तुर्भावेन हित्वा तमहं wee Ise!
इति raft बुद्ध्या नारायणगृहीतया । हित्वान्यभावमज्ञानं aa: स्वं भावमाश्रित: ive
यत् तद् ब्रह्म परं सूक्ष्ममशून्यं शून्यकल्पितम्। भगवान् वासुदेवेति यं गृणन्ति हि सात्वता: ।४९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां नवमस्कन्धे सूर्यवंद्ञानुवर्णने नवमोऽध्वाय: ।९1
Rid of the curse (of his preceptor) at the end of twelve years, and fully intent upon
copulation, he was stopped by his wife (Madayanti), who had come to know of the curse
pronounced on him by the (aforesaid) Brahmana lady. (37) Thenceforth he gave up the
pleasures of sex and (consequently) did not have any issue due to his (Own) action (of
devouring 8 Brahmana). Entreated by him, the sage Vasistha begot an issue through
Madayanti. (38) She actually bore the child in her womb for seven years; the boy (however)
did not see the light (yet). Vasistha (thereupon) hit her abdomen with a stone; and the boy
(who thus emerged from the womb) was for that reason called ASmaka. (39) From (the loins
of) ASmaka sprang up Millaka, who was effectively protected (against the wrath of

Parasurama) by women (who actually shielded his body as an armour). (Hence) he was
called by the name of Narikavaca. When not a single Ksatriya was left (after the
