Dis. 31 ] BOOK THREE 275

Retr Sete Sinn srininth Snininne a ininine ttf inininih = toinininh tt fninintn? f aoininint & frtninink di trining & totoiniint ६ ६३६४

भासेन तु शिरो द्वाभ्याँ वाह्वङ्ध्याद्यङ्गविग्रह: i नखलोमास्थिचर्माणि लिङ्गच्छिद्रोद्भवस्रिभि: 131

चतुर्भिर्धातव: wa पञ्चभि: क्षुत्तृडुद्धव: । षड्भिर्जरायुणा वीत: कुक्षो भ्राम्यति दक्षिणे iv!

मातुर्जग्धान्नपानाद्यैरेधद्धातुरसम्मते laa विण्मूत्रयोरर्ते स जन्तुर्जन्तुसम्भवे iu

कृमिभि: क्षतसर्वाङ्ग: सौकुमार्यात्प्रतिक्षणम्। मूर्च्छमाप्नोत्युरुक्केशस्तत्रत्यै: क्षुधितैर्मुहु: । ६।

कदुतीक्ष्णोष्णलवणसरूक्षाम्लादिभिरुल्बणे: । मातृभुक्तैरुपस्पृष्ट: सर्वाङ्गोत्थितवेदन: ।७।

उल्खेन . संवृतस्तस्मिन्नन्रैश्च बहिरावृत: । आस्ते कृत्वा शिर: Hat भुम्नपृष्ठशिरोधर: ।८।

अकल्प: स्वाङ्गचेष्टायां Wed sa पञ्जरे। तत्र लब्धस्मृतिर्दैवात्कर्म wagers

स्मरन्दीर्घमनुच्छ्वासं ae किं नाम विन्दते । ९

The Lord resumed : By force of Karma (destiny), as directed by Providence, the soul
(destined to be born as a man) enters the womb of a woman through the generative fluid of
aman for the formation of a body. (1) In the course of a nightitis integrated by being united
with the ovum, and in five nights it is rounded into the shape of a bubble. In a period of ten
days it becomes as hard as a plum and later on it develops into the shape of a ball of flesh
or an egg (in the case of oviparous creatures).(2) In the course of a month a head is formed
and at the end of two months hands, feet and other limbs take shape. By the end of three
months the nails (of fingers and toes), the hair on the body, bones and skin appear, as also
the organ of generation and the other apertures in the body (those of eyes, nostrils, ears,
mouth and anus).(3) In as many as four months the seven essential ingredients of the body
(viz., chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen) come into being; while at the end of
five months hunger and thirst make themselves felt: In the course of six months the foetus
is enclosed by an amnion and begins to move in the right side of the abdomen (or in the left
if itis a female). (4) Deriving its nutrition from the food and drink etc., taken by the mother,
the foetus grows and remains in that abominable receptacle of faeces and urine, the
breeding-place of worms.(5) Bitten again and again all over the body by the hungry worms
in the abdomen itself, the creature suffers terrible agony on account of its tenderness and
swoons away moment after moment.(6) Nay, adversely affected by the bitter, pungent, hot,
salt, dry, acid and other such irritating substances consumed by its mother, the foetus
experiences a painful sensation in every part of its body. (7) Enclosed by the amnion and
covered outside by the intestines, it remains lying in one side of the abdomen with its head
turned towards the belly and with its back and neck arched (like a bow).(8) Unable to move
its own limbs like a bird which cannot freely move in a cage, the creature in the womb finds
its memory awakened by the will of Providence and recollects its doings committed during
hundreds of previous lives and feels suffocated for a long time. What peace of mind can it
have under such circumstances? (9)

आरभ्य सप्तमान्मासाल्लब्धबोधोऽपि afta: नैकत्रास्ते सूतिवातैर्विष्ठाभूरिवं सोदर: 1201

नाथमान ऋषिर्भीत: सप्तवध्रि: कृताञ्जलि: । स्तुवीत तं fagan arn येनोदरेऽर्पित: 1221

The foetus, though endowed with consciousness from the seventh month of its
conception, is tossed by the winds that press the embryo downwards during the weeks
preceding delivery, and cannot remain at one place like the worm born of faeces in the same
abdominal cavity. (10) Tied to the physical body, made up of the seven ingredients
(mentioned in verse 4 above), which are like so many cords to bindit, the human soul, which
regards the body as his own self, is much afraid (of the process of gestation being repeated
in other such births), and with joined palms he entreats and extols Him by whom he was cast
into the womb, in a tone full of agony. (11)
