Dis. 30] BOOK TEN 231

त्त्रैकोवाच 2 गोपा दावाग्निं ceca waeraftest वो विधास्ये क्षेममञ्जसा ।२२।
बद्धान्यया स्रजा काचित्तन्वी aa उळूखळे।र्भम्रासुद्वृकृपिध्रत्मास्य॰भैजेभीतिम्रिद्वाबनम्।रइ।
Thus raving like a madman. the cowherd women. who got very distracted in their quest

for Sri Krsna and felt identified with Him, actually imitated the various pastimes of the
Lord.(14) Personating Sri Krsna, one Gop! sucked the breast of another, who played the part
of Pitana. Behaving like infant Sri Krsna and crying (like a babe}, another kicked a fourth,
that rested onall fours over the latter as a cart. (15) Playing the role of Trnavarta (the demon),
a certain Gopi carried away another, who fancied herself to be infant Sri Krsna; while a third
crawled on hands and knees (like infant Sri Krsna), dragging her feet accompanied by the
jingling sounds of her anklets. (16) Two (of the Gopis) played the role of Sri Krsna and
Balarama indeed; while some behaved like cowherd boys (and the demons Vatsa and Baka).
Of the former two (viz., those that behaved like Sri Krsna and Balarama), again, the latter
struck at her friend who personated Vatsasura”, while the former struck ai a fourth that had
assumed the role of Bakasura. (17) Calling tothe cows. thathad gone faraway, inthemanner
of Sri Krsna, a certain Gopi behaved like Him, playing on the flute and sporting (as He did):
while others applauded her saying, "Well done I" (18) With her mind absorbedin Him another
Gopi walked (to and fro) resting her arm on some friend and said, "Hullo, |am Krsna ! Look
at my graceful gait." (19) "Do not be afraid of storm and shower; protection against them has
(already) been provided by Me !" observing thus, one held up herscarf with one hand making
a show of effort (in doing so). (20) Treading on another's head and standing on her, O
Protector of men, a certain Gop said, "O vile snake, clear away ! Indeed | am born (here) as
the chastiser of the wicked." (21) One of ihose Gopis said (to others; visualizing them as so
many cowherds), “O Gopas look at the terrible forest fire ! Shut your eyes at once; | shail
easily vouchsafe protection to you." (22) Tied to another Gopi, that had been seated in such
a way as to pass for a mortar, with a garland by another (who played the role of Sri Krsna's
mother) and (consequently) afraid, one delicate lady of that lot with lovely eyes covered her
face and put up a show of fear. (23)

एवं कृष्णं पृच्छमाना वृन्दावनलतास्तरून्। sees वनोद्देशे पदानि परमात्मन: ।२४॥
पदानि व्यक्तमेतानि नन्दसूनोर्महात्मन: । लक्ष्यन्ते fe ध्वजाभ्भोजवज्राङ्कुशायवादिभि: ।२५॥
तैस्तै:पदैस्तत्पदवीमन्विच्छन्त्योऽग्रतोऽबला | वध्वा: US: सुपृक्तानि विलोक्यार्ता: समब्रुवन् । २६॥
wer पदानि चैतानि याताया नन्दसूनुना । अंसन्यस्तप्रकोष्ठाया: करेणो: ROT यथा । २७।
अनयाऽऽराधितो Fo भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: । oat विहाय गोविन्द: प्रीतो चामनयद् रह: । २८॥
धन्या Stat अमी आल्यो गोविन्दाङ्घ्र्यब्जरेणव: । वान् ब्रह्मेशो रमा देवी दधुर्मूर्ध्यघनुत्तये 1२९॥
wen अमूनि a: क्लोभं कुर्वन्त्य्चै: पदानि यत् । यैकापहृत्य गोपीनां रहो भुङ्क्तेऽच्युताधरम् | 30 |
न लक्ष्यन्ते पदान्यत्र तस्या नूनं तृणाङ्कुरें:।खिद्यत्सृजाताइघ्नितलापुंन्निन्येन्नेयसींप्रिय:।इशा
इमान्यधिकमम्नानि पदानि वहतो वधूम् | गोप्य: पङ्यत कृष्णस्य भाराक्रान्तस्य कामिन: । ३२।
अत्रावरोपिता कान्ता पुष्पहेतोर्महात्मना। अत्र प्रसूनावचय: प्रियार्थे प्रेयसा कृत: |
प्रपदाक्रमणे Wa पर्यतासकले पदे 133 |
केशप्रसाधनं त्वत्र कामिन्या: कामिना कृतम्। तानि चूडयता कान्तामुपविष्टमिह ध्रुवम् ।३४॥

* According to popular tradition it was Balarar nd not $i Krsna, who kiflea Vatsasura—

Evidently this traditton is referred to by the sage Sukxa in the above verse.
