414 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 27

PR RARER EAA RAE EEE AAA AAED A EEE AREER ETERNAL CECE NAAT AREER ER EHH OETA OKEES

a पञ्चालपति: gam पितृवंशविवर्धनान्। at: संयोजयामास gfe: सदृगैर्वरे: । ८ ।
पुत्राणां चाभवन् पुत्रा एकैकस्य ad शतम् ae पौरञ्जनो de: पञ्चालेषु समेधित: । ९ |
तेषु तद्रिक्थहारेषु गृहकोशानुजीविषु । निरूढेन ममत्वेन विषयेष्नन्वबध्यत । १०॥
ईजे च क्रतुभिर्घोरैर्दीक्षितत पशुमारकै: | देवान् पितॄन् भूतपतीन्नानाकामो यथा भवान् । ११॥
Gra प्रमत्तस्य कुदुम्बासक्तचेतस: | आससादसवै कालो योऽप्रिय: प्रिययोषिताम् । १२।

_ While he thus tasted sensual delights with her, his mind (reason) clouded by passion,
his youth passed away—half a second as it were, O king of kings | (5) Emperor Purafijana
begot through that Purafijant (as many as) eleven hundred sons and one hundred and ten
daughters. These latter brought glory to their parents and were endowed with a noble
character and virtues like generosity and so on. They became (collectively) known as
Paurafijanis (daughters of Purafijana and Purafijani),O ruler of men. By the time (he begot
all these) half his life was spent. (6-7) That ruler of Paficala duly united his sons, who
propagated their ancestral line, with (worthy) brides and his daughters with suitable
bridegrooms. (8) A hundred sons were born in due course to each of his sons. By these the
race of Puraiijana considerably grew in the land of the Paficalas. (9) Through a deep-seated
feeling of mineness in respect of his sons and grandsons (the heirs of sons), houses,
treasury and dependants (servants, ministers and so on), he got attached to the objects
of sense more and more. (10) And, prompted by manifold desires, he worshipped, as you
did, the gods and manes as well as the lords of ghosts through (a number of) horrible
sacrifices involving animal-slaughter, after being (duly) consecrated for them. (11) While he
thus remained unmindful of all that was conducive to his welfare, his mind being attached
to his family, the period of senility stole upon him—a period (most) unwelcome to those who
are fond of women. (12)

चण्डवेग इति ख्यातो गन्धर्वाधिपतिर्नृप । गन्धर्वास्तस्य बलिन: षष्टयुत्तरशातत्रयम् 1 83 |

गन्धर्व्यस्तादृशीरस्य मैथुन्यश्च सितासिता: । परिवृत्तया विलुम्पन्ति सर्वकामविनिर्मिताम् । ex!

a चण्डवेगानुचरा:र पुरञ्जनपुरुं यदा।हर्तुमारेभिरे तत्र प्रत्यषेधत्प्रजागर: ।१५॥

स सप्तभि: water fen च aa समा:। पुरञ्जनपुराध्यक्षो गन्धर्वैर्युयुधे बली REI

क्षीयमाणे wera एकस्मिन् बहुभिर्युधा feat परां जगामार्त: सराष्टृपुरबान्धव: ।१७।

स एवं wt मधुभुक्पञ्चालेषु aoe: । उपनीतं ate Ter, स्रीजितो नाविदद्भयम् । eC |

(Now) there is a chief of the Gandharvas, known by the name of Candavega, O king |

Three hundred and sixty strong Gandharvas (celestial musicians), forming his retinue, and
Gandharva women, equally strong, half of them fair and others dark (of complexion), pairing
with them, ravage by rotation a city which is well provided with all objects of enjoyment (even)
when it was built. (13-14) When these attendants of Candavega commenced pillaging the
capital of Purafijana, Prajagara (the serpent) offered resistance there. (15) For (full) hundred
years that powerful guard of the city fought single-handed with those seven hundred and
twenty (Gandharvas of both sexes). (16) When his relation (Prajagara) began to lose
strength as a result of his combat with many, Purafijana felt (extremely) distressed with his
(entire) dominion and city and kinsmen (too), and was filled with great anxiety. (17) Being
the only drinker at his own capital in the kingdom of Paficala and thus receiving the tribute
brought by his own retainers, that hen-pecked monarch knew nothing of (the impending)
fear. (18)

कालस्य दुहिता काचित्निलोकीं वरमिच्छती । पर्यटन्ती न वर्हिष्मन् प्रत्यनन्दत कश्चन ।१९॥

