Dis. 5] BOOK FOUR . : 307

ह्रत्त ह तीत्त कक ESSERE LEEEEEH KEES EERLEEERER AREA THE OEE ERATE EEE EEA HEHE AERA
ज्न्र

of respect) the all-pervading Lord, the adored of (all ) the gods (and departed). At that time
he thought himself, by virtue of his irresistible force, as capable of braving the might of the
most powerful, O dear Vidura. (5) He thundered most terribly and, lifting his trident, which
was capable of destroying even Death (the destroyer of the universe), ran (towards Daksa’s
abode), followed by the attendants of Sri Rudra—who were (all) roaring violently—the
anklets about his ankles making a jingling sound (even as he trod on the earth). (6)

aaa यजमान: ween: ककुभ्युदीच्यां प्रसमीक्ष्य रेणुम्।

तम: किमेतत्कुत एतद्रजोऽभूदिति fan द्विजपत्न्यश्च दध्यु: । ७ ।

at न वान्ति न fe सन्ति दस्यव: प्राचीनबर्हिर्जीवति होग्रदण्ड: ।

Tat न काल्यन्त इदं Hal रजो लोकोऽधुना fH प्रलयाय कल्पते । ८ ।

प्रसूतिमिश्रा:: faa simi ऊचुर्विपाको वृजिनस्यैष तस्य ।

यत्पश्यन्तीनां दुहितॄणां प्रजेश: सुतां सतीमवदध्यावनागाम्। ९ ।

यस्त्वन्तकाले व्युप्लजटाकलाप: स्वशूलसूच्यर्पितदिगाजेन्द्र: ।

वितत्य नृत्यत्युदितास्ररदोर्ध्वजानुच्चाट्टहासस्तनयित्नुभिन्नदिक् 1201

अमर्षयित्वा तमसह्यतेजसं मन्युप्नुतं दुर्विषहं भ्रुकुट्या ।

करालदंष्टाभिरुदस्तभागणं स्यात्स्वस्ति fe कोपयतो विधातु: 1221

Seeing dust in the northern quarter, the priests officiating at the sacrifice, the sacrificer

(Daksa), those assembled there and all the (other) Brahmanas and their wives thought on
the other side:"What can this darkness be? Whence has this dust come? (7) Winds are not
blowing and there are certainly no robbers; for (king) Pracinabarhi, who rules with an Iron
rod is (still) alive. Nor is it the time for cows being hurriedly taken back (from the pastures).
Whence is this (cloud of) dust (then)? Is the world preparing for its doom (just) now ?" (8)
Troubled in mind, Prastti (Daksa’s wife) and the other ladies observed, "This is nothing but
the (evil) consequence of the wrong perpetrated by Daksa (the lord of created beings), who
before the very eyes of his (other) daughters slighted his innocent daughter, Sati! (9) (Or
it may be the fruit of the offence committed against Sri Rudra, the god of destruction) who
dances at the time of (universal) destruction, throwing about the tuft of His matted hair and
extending His banner-like arms equipped with uplifted weapons, when the lords of elephants
presiding over the quarters are pierced by the prongs of His trident and the quarters rent with
His thunder-like peals of laughter. (10) Nay, possessed of a dazzling splendour and filled
with anger, He assumes an unbearable aspect by His knit brows, and the whole group of
constellations is scattered by His frightful teeth. Having angered Him can any one fare well
even if the individual provoking Him is the creator himself ?" (11)

बह्वेवमुद्विम्नदृशोच्यमाने जनेन दक्षस्य मुहुर्महात्मन: |

उत्पेतुरुत्पाततमा: सहस्रशो भयावहा fee wt च पर्यक् ।१२॥

तावत्स रुद्रानुचरैर्मखो Ter, नानायुंधैर्वामनकैरुदायुधै: |

पिङ्गै: पिशङ्खैर्मकरोदराननै: पर्याद्रवद्भिर्विदुरान्वरुध्यत 1231
केचिद्वभञ्जु: svat पत्नीशालां तथापरे। ae आग्नीध्रशालां च तद्बिहारं महानसम् ।१४॥
रुरुजुर्यज्ञपात्राणि तथैकेऽग्नीननादशयन् । कुण्डेष्ममूत्रयन् केचिद्विभिदुर्वेदिमेखला: । १५॥
अबाधन्त मुनीनन्य एके पत्नीरतर्जयन्। अपरे जगृहुर्देवान् प्रत्यासन्नान् पलायितान् । १६॥
भृगुं ary मणिमान् वीरभद्र: प्रजापतिम्।चण्डीश: पूषणं देवं भगं नन्दीश्वरोऽग्रहीत् ie!
