336 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 53

LRG NTR UA GET EEE SE Se eee Tene eh TrENletreretrertere ee eroominerrehreren

worth doing in this connection may be done without delay. (44)

Thus ends the fifty-second discourse, bearing on the subject of Rukmini's wedding,
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samnhita.

cthitines ti
Pew SSS ier

अथ त्रिपञ्जाशत्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LIIl

Sri Krsna carries away Rukmini
SYR उवाच
aaa स तु सन्देशं निशम्य यदुनन्दन: । प्रगृह्य पाणिना पाणिं प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत्। १ ।

Sri Suka began again : Hearing the message of Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha), the
said Sri Krsna ( a Scion of Yadu), however, heartily !aughed and, warmly clasping the
Brahmana's hand by His own, spoke (to him) as follows. (1)

5

श्रीभगवानुवाच
तथाहमपि तच्चित्तो fat च न लभे निशि । वेदाहं रुक्मिणा द्वेषान्ममोद्वाहो निवारित: । २ ।
तामानयिष्य उन्मध्य राजन्यापसदान् मृधे। मत्परामनवद्याङ्गीमेधसोऽग्निशिखामिव । ३ ।
The glorious Lord said : My mindis likewise set on her and I getno sleep at night. | know
my marriage (with her) has been stopped by Rukmi out of (personal) grudge (against Me).(2)
Having routed in battle the vile kings (that will be assembled at Kundinapura), | shall bring

(to Dwaraka) that princess of faultless limbs, (so) devoted to Me, even as one would capture
a flame out of firewood. (3)

aye उवाच
vee च विज्ञाय रुक्मिण्या मधुसूदन: iw: संयुज्यतामाशु दारुकेत्याह सारथिम् । ४ ।
स चाश्वै: उदौव्यसुग्रीवमेघपुष्पबलाहकै: ge रथमुपानीय तस्थौ प्राञ्जलिरग्रत: । ५ ।
aa स्यन्दनं झयौरिर्दिजमारोप्य तूर्णगै: । आन्त्तादेकरात्रेण विदर्भानगमद्धयै: । ६ ।

Sri Suka continued : Having come to know definitely (through the Brahmana) about the
constellation under which the wedding of Rukmini was going to take place (on the third day
thence), Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) said to His charioteer, “Let the chariot
be got ready at once, O Daruka !” (4) Having brought the chariot drawn by (four) horses—
Saibya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa and Balahaka—Daruka too stood before the Lord with joined
palms. (5) Mounting the chariot and picking up the Brahmana (too), Sri Krsna (Grandson of
Sura) journeyed from Anarta to the Vidarbha territory in the course of a single night with the
help of those swift horses. (6)

राजा स कुण्डिनपति: पुत्रस्नेहवशं गत:। शिशुपालाय स्वां कन्यां दास्यन्कर्माण्यकारयत्। ७ |
पुरं सम्पृष्टसंसिक्तमार्गरथ्याचतुष्पथम् | चित्रध्वजपताकाभिस्तोरणै: समलङ्कृतम् । ८ |
