536 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

न न न्न्न् EDEL ENN EO KNEE ERNE RHEE OH ECE डदा माड क 8५ ७ मा ल 4८ ३१० ४4 # 4७ १2 ८५

Kali assumes different colours, names and forms and is worshipped in different modes. (20)
In the Satya age the Lordis of white complexion, has four arms, wears matted locks andis clad
in barks and deerskin. He puts on the sacred thread and carries a rosary of Rudraksa anda
staff and a Kamandalu (water-pot made of wild cocoanut shell). (21) In that age men have as
a matter of fact a calm mind, entertain no feeling of animosity towards anybody andare friendly
towards all creatures; they look upon all with an equal eye. They propitiate the Lord by their
Tapas (in the form of contemplation) and by their control of mind and the senses.(22) (In the
Satya age) the Lord is called by the names of Harnsa, Suparna, Vaikuntha, Dharma,
Yogeswara, Amala, Iswara, Purusa, Avyaktaand Paramatma. (23) Inthe age of Treta the Lord
is of crimson hue; He has four arms, wears a triple cord about His loins and has golden locks.
He appears in the form of sacrifices as described in the three Vedas and wields on His person
a Sruk, Sruva (ladles for pouring ghee into the sacred fire) and other accessories used in the
performance of sacrifices. (24) In that age pious men who are teachers of the Vedas worship
through the Vedic lore Lord Sri Hari as an embodiment of all the deities. (25) (In that age of
Treta) He is called by the names of Visnu, Yajfia, Prsnigarbha, Sarvadeva, Urukrama, Vrsakapi,
Jayanta and Urugaya. (26) In the Owapara age the Lordis of a dark brown complexion, remains
cladin yellow silk, wields (in His arms) His own weapons and emblems (viz., the conch, discus,
mace and lotus), wears the Kaustubha gem and is distinguished by the marks of Srivatsa (a
curl of white hair on the right side of His bosom) etc. (27) In that age, O king, men seeking to
know the ultimate Reality worship the Supreme Person, who is characterized by the regalia
proper to a monarch (such as the umbrella, fly-whisk etc.), as indicated in the Vedas and the
Tantras. (28) Hail to You, Vasudeva; hail to Sankarsana and hail to You, the almighty Lord, as
Pradyumna and Anirudha ! (29) Hail to the sage Narayana, the almighty, all-pervading, all-
embodying Ruler of the universe, dwelling in the heart of all. (30) O king, it is thus that people
adore and praise the Lord of the universe in the Dwapara age. (Now) hear how they worship
Him with various rituals prescribed by the Tantras during the Kali age. (31)

कृष्णवर्णं त्विषाकृष्णं साङ्गोपाङ्गास्त्रपार्चदम्। aa: सङ्कीर्तनप्रायैर्यजन्ति fe सुमेधस: 1321
ध्येयं सदा परिभवघ्नमभीष्टदोहं तीर्थास्पदं शिवविरिञ्चिनुतं हारण्यम् ।
भृत्यार्तिहं प्रणतपाल भवाब्धिपोतं वन्दे महापुरुष a चरणारविन्दम् ।३३॥
wa सुदुस्त्यजसुरेप्सितराज्यलक्ष्मीं afig आर्यवचसा यदगादरण्यम् ।
मायामृगं दयितयेप्सितमन्वधावद् वन्दे महापुरुष a चरणारविन्दम् ।३४॥

It is well-known that (in this age) wise men worship, through sacrifices mostly consisting
of chanting the names of the Lord and singing His praises, the Lord who is of a dark colour,
though bright by lustre, perfect in all limbs, adorned with ornaments, furnished with His
weapons and waited upon by His attendants. (32) O the most exalted person, O the Protector
of devotees, | bow to Your lotus-feet which are worthy of being constantly meditated upon,
putan endtoall discomfiture, yield all desired boons, which are the focus of all sacred places,
are extolled by Siva and Brahma, afford shelter to all and dispel the distress of devotees and
which serve as a bark for crossing the ocean of mundane existence. (33) O the most exalted
and righteous Person, | bow to Thy lotus-feet, which ran after the illusory deer sought after
by Thy beloved one (Sita). You resigned the royal fortume—which was coveted by the gods

and was most difficult to forsake—(merely) at the word of your father and went away (in exile)
to the forest. (34)

एवं युगानुरूपाभ्यां भगवान् युगवर्तिभि: । मनुजैरिज्यते राजन् श्रेयसामीश्वरो eft: । ३५॥
कलिं सभाजयन्त्यार्या गुणज्ञा: सारभागिन: । यत्र सङ्कीर्तनेनैव ad: स्वार्थोऽभिलभ्यते 1361
