Dis. 15 ]. ->~BOOK THREE ` ` 205

ERRHAEARHAHR CWKHHHEEAE CEES ELHELTHKH HEY eee eeeE eee heer EA HHhAH eee eee EN A hee

व । —_— a उ

श्यामे पृथावुरसि anf Brn स्वश्चूडामणिं सुभगयन्तमिवात्मधिष्ण्यम् 13¢ 1

पीतांशुके पृथुनितम्बिनि विस्फुरन्त्या काञ्च्यालिभिर्विरुतया वनमालया च |

वल्गुप्रकोष्ठबलयं विनतासुतांसे विन्यस्तहस्तमितरेण धुनानमब्जम् ।४०॥

विद्युत्क्षिपन्मकरकुण्डलमण्डनार्हगण्डस्थलोन्नसमुखं मणिमत्किरीटम् ।

दोर्दुण्डषण्डविवरे हरता परार्घ्यहारेण कन्धरगतेन च ATS II

मह्यं भवस्य भवतां च भजन्तमङ्गं नेमुर्निरीक्ष्य नवितृप्तदृशो मुदा कै: ।४२॥

That very moment the Lord, whose navel is the seat of a lotus, and who is the delight of the
righteous, learnt about the insult thus offered by His own servants to saints (like Sanaka and his
three brothers), andwentto the spot (where the sages had been held up) on those very feet which
were sought after by recluses and great sages, accompanied by Sri (His beloved Spouse). (37)
The Sages saw that the Lord, who was the goal of their Samadhi (profound meditation), had
arrived before their very eyes, accompanied by His own attendants, who carried articles suited
to the visit (such as the umbrella, chowries and so on). The white umbrella (which was held over
His head) looked like the moon; (while the strings of pearls hanging from its edge) and dancing
in the cool breeze coming from the pair of chowries that (were being waved on both His sides
and) shone like swans looked like drops of nectar falling from its rays. (38) The Lord, who is the
repository of all thatis worth coveting, was graciously disposed towards all and touched the heart
(of His devotees) by His affectionate glances. With Goddess Laksmi, who shone on His swarthy
and broad chest (in the form of a golden streak), He enhanced the beauty as it were of His own
abode (Vaikuntha) the crest-jewel of all heavenly worlds. (39) He was adomed with a girdle that
shone brightly on the yellow cloth covering His large hips and with a garland of sylvan flowers,
which was distinguished by the humming of bees; His lovely wrists were graced with bracelets,
and He had rested one of His hands on the shoulder of Garuda (the son of Vinata) and was
revolving a lotus with another. (40) His countenance was distinguished by cheeks—which
enhanced the beauty of the alligator-shaped pendants, that outshone lightning—and a prominent
nose; and His head was covered with a crown studded with gems. A charming and superb
necklace was hanging between His stout arms, while His neck was adorned with the gem known
by the name of Kaustubha. (41) The sages regarded with unsated eyes,and joyously bowed their
heads to, the Lord who (says Brahma to the gods) had assumed a personality for his (Brahma's)
own sake as well as for the sake of Bhava (Lord Siva) and yourselves (the other gods)—a
personality which was full of abundant charm and about which His devotees thought within
themselves that Indira's (Laksmr's) excessive pride (of beauty) disappeared (atits very sight). (42)

: ।
अन्तर्गत: स्वविवरेण चकार तेषां सङ्खोभमक्षरजुषामपि चित्ततन्वो: 1x31
a वा अमुष्य वदनासितपद्मोकशमुद्बीक्ष्य सुन्दर्तराधरकुन्दहासम् ।
लब्धाशिष: पुनरवेक्ष्य तदीयमङ्ध्रिद्वद्वं नखारुणमणिश्रयणे निदध्यु: ive
पुंसां गतिं मृगयतामिह योगमार्यैर्ध्यनास्पदं ag ad नयनाभिरामम्।
पांस्रं वपुर्दर्शयानमनन्यसिद्धैरौत्पत्तिकै: समंगृणन् युतमष्टभोगे: ।४५॥

The breeze laden with the honey of the Tulasi blossoms, mixed with the dust of the lotus-
feet of that lotus-eyed Lord, entered the interior of those sages through the nose (the door for its
passage) and not only thrilled their body but caused a flutter in their mind too, (ever) immersed
