Dis. 48 ] BOOK TEN St

SOE YO I वा Sg eos 8 Seto in retin

amorous gestures. (5) Calling (to His side) the lovely damsel, timid (as she was) through
bashfulness occasioned by her (very) first meeting (with a lover), and seizing her by the hand,
adorned with a bracelet, the Lord set her on the bed and dallied with the charming girl, her
only merit (entitling her to this rare privilege and honour) being that she had (willingly) offered
(to Him) sandal-paste (which was meant for Karnsa, her master, who had a special liking for
it). (6) Enjoying the (transcendent) smell of His feet and brushing off the suffering of her
breasts, bosom and eyes—tormented (as they were) with pangs of love—by the (soothing
and thrilling) touch of the feet of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), she folded in her arms the all-
blissful Darling, who (now) rested on her bosom, and (thereby) got rid of her agony (of
separation from Him) of very long standing. (7) Alas! having thus secured by offering pigment
the presence of Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, the Bestower of final beatitude, (who is) so
difficult to attain, the hapless woman (unlike the blessed Gopis, who dedicated their all to Him
and sought nothing in return) asked (of Him) the following (viz., the gratification of her carnal
desire, although her physical contact alone with the all-blissful and all-powerful Lord was
enough to ensure for her the highest blessing in the form of final beatitude). (8) She said, "(Be
pleased to) stay here (in my house) for a few days and make merry with me, my most
beloved friend, (for) | dare not forgo your company, O lotus-eyed one !" (9) Granting her
the desired boon (in the shape of a promise to revel with her again) and honouring her (with
suitable presents and polite words and thereby acknowledging her service), Sri Krsna (the
Ruler of all), who respects (the wishes of) all, returned with Uddhava to His own abode
(Vasudeva's house), (which was) full of prosperity.) (10) He who, having duly propitiated
Sri Krsna (the all-pervading Lord). the Ruler (even) of universal lords (Brahma, Siva and
others), who is so hard to please (except through exclusive Devotion), asks for that which
is acceptable (agreeable) to the mind is of perverted understanding because of his
pettiness. (11)

अक्रूरभवनं कृष्ण: सहरामोद्ध्व: प्रभु:। किञ्चिच्चिकीर्षयन् प्रागादक्रूरप्रियकाम्यया 1821
स तान् नरवरश्रेष्ठानाराद् वीक्ष्य स्वबान्धवान्। प्रत्युत्थाय safes: परिषुज्याभ्यनन्दत 1231
ननाम कृष्णं रामं च स तेरप्यभिवादित: | पूजवामास विधिवत् कृतासनपरिग्रहान् ।१४॥
पादावनेजनीरापो धारयज्छिसा नॄप | अर्हणेनाम्वरैर्दिव्यैर्गन्धस्रग्भूषणोत्तमे: । १५॥
अर्चित्वा शिरसाऽऽनम्य पादावङ्कुगतौ मृजन्। प्रश्रयावनतोऽक्रूर: कृष्णरामावभाषत । १६॥
दिष्ट्या पापो हत: कंस: सानुगो वामिदं कुलम्। भवद्भ्यामुद्धृतं Haye दुरन्ताच्च समेधितम् । १७॥
gat प्रधानपुरुषौ sma. जगन्मयौ | भवद्भ्यां न विना किञ्चित्परमस्ति न चापरम् gc
आत्मसृष्टमिदं विश्वमन्वाविञ्य स्वजञक्तिभि: | ईयते बहुधा ब्रह्मन् श्रुतप्रत्यक्षगोचरम् ।१९॥

an हि gag चराचरेषु मह्यादयो चोनिषु भान्ति ArT.

एवं भवान् केवल आत्मयोनिघ्वात्माऽत्मतन्रो बहुधा विभाति 120!

न बध्यसे तद्गुणकर्मभिर्वा wares कछ्व च बन्धहेतु: 1281

देहाद्युपाधेरनिरूपितत्वाद् wal न साक्षान्न भिदाऽऽत्मन: स्यात्।

adi न बन्धस्तव fa ma: स्यातां निकामस्त्वयि. नोऽविवेक: 1221

त्वयोदितोऽयं जगतो हिताय दा यदा वेदपथ: पुराण: ।

aaa पाखण्डपथैरसद्धिस्तदा भवान् सत्त्वगुणे बिभर्ति 122

स a प्रभोऽद्य वसुदेवगृहेऽवतीर्ण: SR भारमपनेतुमिहासि भूमे: ।
