Dis. 4] BOOK TEN 117

SHRAH TEA HARE AED AH TTA ERAT ENOTES AH ECHAM ## १28 # 87 AMANO श्वआ 6994 # 99१ %बमन 9668

ama मम died साधवो दीनवत्सला: | इत्युक्त्वाश्रुमुख: पादौ gare: स्वस्रोरथाग्रहीत् 1231
मोचयामास fs fare: कन्यकागिरा ! देवकीं वसुदेवं च दर्दययन्नात्मसौहदम् ।२४॥
भ्रातु: समनुतप्तस्य ara te च देवकी । व्यसृजद् वसुदेवश्च प्रहस्य तमुवाच ह । २५॥
एवमेतन्महाभाग यथा वदसि देहिनाम्। अज्ञानप्रभवाहंधी: स्वपरेति भिदा aa: ।२६॥
शोकहर्षभयद्वेषलोभमोहमदान्विता: i मिथो ae न पश्यन्ति भावैर्भावं पृथग्दूशा: 1201

Highly amazed to hear the words uttered by Her and having completely liberated Devaki
and Vasudeva, Karhsa spoke with humility (as follows):—(14) “Oh! cousin ! Oh ! brother-in-
law, alas, many 4 son of yours has been killed by me, a sinner (as । am), (even) as an ogre
may kill his (own) progeny. (15) Having forsworn compassion and disowned my kinsmenand
(other) relatives indeed, and (virtually) dead, though breathing, to what (infernal) regions
shall | actually descend like a slayer of Brahmanas, a notorious wretch as | am ? (16) Not
only mortals but gods as well utter falsehood, putting faith in whom ।, a sinner, killed my
cousin's babes | (17) (Pray,) do not lament your sons, who only reaped what they had sown
(in their previous existence), O highly blessed souls | Living beings do not, as a rule, live for
ever, or at one place (even) so tong as they live, being under the control of destiny. (18) As
earthen pots come and go (appear and disappear) on the earth, so do bodies (of living
beings) in the Self. And even as the earth undergoes no change consequent on the earthly
beings undergoing transformation, so the Seif (too) does not change consequent on the
bodies undergoing changes (in the form of birth, death and soon), (19) Inhim whois not really
cognizant of this fact arises misapprehension regarding the self (in the form of self-
identification with the body, which is other than the self), from which proceeds the notion of
difference (between the self and the not-self). Thence come about the union with and
separation from other bodies (viz., those of his sons and other near and dear ones) and (the
result is that) transmigration (and the resultant harvest of joys and sorrows) does not cease
(in his case so long as his aforesaid misapprehension does not disappear. (20) Therefore
(although in truth neither they were your sons nor did । kill them), 0 blessed lady, do not
sorrow for your sons, though slain by me; for everyone helplessly reaps the fruit of one’s own
(past) actions. (21) The fool who does not cognize his (true) self and identifies himself with
a (material) body assumes the role of a victim or agent of persecution (only) so long as he
feels वां ` वा slain or! am the slayer.’ (22) (Pray), forgive you both my wickedness; for pious
souls (like you) are (as a rule) fond of the afflicted." Saying so, and with his face wet with tears,
Karnsa (the brother-in-law of Vasudeva) forthwith clasped the feet of his cousin and her
husband. (23) Reassured by the utterance of the (divine) girl, he rid Devaki and Vasudeva
of (their) chains, exhibiting his affection (for them). (24) Having vouchsafed her forgiveness
to the cousin, who was fully repentant, Devaki gave up her anger as well; while Vasudeva
laughingly spoke to him as follows:—(25) "It is precisely as you say, O highly blessed one!
The feeling in embodied beings that lt am this body etc., from which proceeds the distinction
that ‘this is mine’ and ‘that is not mine’, has its origin in ignorance. (26) Full of grief, delight,
fear, hatred, greed, infatuation and pride, those possessed of a differentiating eye, do not
perceive God (manifested as the Time-Spirit) destroying beings through the agency of
(other) beings by recourse to mutual strife.“ (27)

i उवाच

केस एवं प्रसन्नाभ्यां faqg प्रतिभाषित: । tantaqearamadistase गृहम् । २८
तस्यां wai व्यतीतायाँ se आहूय मन्त्रिण: । तेभ्य saw तत् ad यदुक्तं योगनिद्रया । २९।
आकर्ण्य भर्तुर्गदितं तमूचुर्देवदात्रव: । देवान् प्रति कृतामर्षा दैतेया नातिकोविदा: 1301

