778 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10

SHORE EHAH KANE L EER ELLER AELECEH TECH ERE HEE SEHR HEHE ADHERE LORE H OES ३६३2 EE HEH

of the demon Bala), got highly enraged. (24) Mounted on Airavata, an elephant guarding the
(eastern) quarter (with the temple-juice streaming from its temples), Indra shone like the sun
(lit., the ruler of the day) appearing on the eastern hill with cascades falling down (its sloping
sides). (25) All round him stood the (other) gods, mounted on their diverse mounts and
carrying different ensigns and weapons, as well as the guardians of the (various) worlds—
Vayu (the wind-god), Agni (the god of fire), Varuna (the god of water) and others—with their
retinue. (26) Rushing violently towards and reproaching one another with words that cut to
the quick, (nay,) challenging one another and rushing forward, they fought in pairs. (27) Bali
contended with Indra; Guha (the younger son of Lord Siva) cast his lot with Taraka; Varuna
fought with Heti and Mitra with Praheti, O Pariksit! (28) Similarly Yama tried his strength with
Kalanabha; ViSwakarma (the architect of heaven), indeed with Maya (the architect of the
demons); Sambara, with Twasta (a lord of created beings) and Virocana (Bali's father and
son of Prahrada) with Savita. (29) Namuci crossed arms with Aparajita, the ASwins (the twin-
born physicians of the gods) with Vrsaparva, and the god Surya (the sun-god) with the
hundred sons of Bali, of whom the eldest was Bana. (30) Soma (the moon-god) likewise
fought with Rahu; Anila (the wind-god) with Puloma, and the powerful Goddess Bhadrakali
with NiSumbha and Sumbha. (31) Vrsakapi (Lord Siva) for His part closed with Jambha;
Vibhavasu (the god of fire), with Mahisa and llwala, accompanied by Vatapi, with the sage
Marici and others (the sons of Brahma), O chastiser of foes ! (32) Durmarsa (one hard to
withstand) had an encounter with Kamadeva (the god of love); Utkala with the Matrkas (the
divine mothers or personified energies of the principal deities); the sage Brhaspati (the
preceptor of the gods), with Usana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of the demons) and
Sanaiscara (the deity presiding over the planet Saturn and a son of the sun-god) with Naraka
(the demon born of the union of the Lord manifestedin the form of the divine Boar with Mother
Earth). (33) The (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods) entered into a conflict with the Nivatakavacas;
the (group of the eight) gods known as the Vasus with the Kaleyas; the (gods called)
Vigwedevas, with the Paulomas and the (eleven) Rudras (the gods of destruction), with the
Krodhavagas (a class of serpents, extremely ferocious by nature, residing in the lower
regions). (34)

a एवमाजावसुरा: gs wet wea च युध्यमाना: |

अन्योन्यमासाद्य निजघ्नुरोजसा जिगीषव्रस्तीक्ष्णहारासितोमरै: । ३५॥

गजास्तुङङ्खा: सरथा: पदातय: सारोहवाहा विविधा व्रिखण्डिता: ।

निकृत्तवाहूरुशिरोधराङ्घ्रयङ्छिन्नध्वजेघ्वासतनुत्रभूषणा: । ३७1

रेणुर्दिश: खं gat च छादयन् न्यवर्ततासृकस्रुतिभि: परिष्रुतात् । ३८

TES: साभरणै: सहायुधै: सा प्रास्तृता भू: करभोरुभिर्बभो 131
कबन्धास्तत्र चोत्पेतु: पतितस्वशिरोऽक्षिभि: | उद्यतायुधदोर्दण्डैराधावन्तो भयन् मृधे ।४०॥
Fighting in pairs as well as collectively on the battle-field in the aforesaid manner and
approaching one another, the Asuras as well as the leaders of the gods violently struck one

another with sharp arrows, swords and iron clubs in their eagerness to win. (35) And they
lopped off the heads of one another with Bhusundis (a kind of-weapon perhaps of the nature
