424 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 72 ©

PAA ENA EERE STERN PEE TT EET SRS RPA EE I RA ET IH AER

of the Rajasiya sacrifice, your auspicious fame will extend to all the three world. (7) This
sovereign sacrifice, O king, is welcomed by the sages, manes, gods, all your friends and
relations including Myself, and, in fact, by all beings. (8) Conquering allthe kings and bringing
the world under your control, collect all necessary things and then perform the great
sacrifice.(9) O king, these brothers of yours are born of deities (like Indra, the wind-god and
others), who are guardians of the world. You yourself are a man of wisdom and self-control
and have conquered Me by your virtues. Those who have not controlled their mind and
senses cannot win Me. (10) Even the greatest of gods in this world cannot expect to
overpower My devotee by means of his energy, glory, splendour and supernatural powers,
much less any earthly being. (11)
श्रीशुक उवाच
निशम्य भगवद्गीतं we: फुल्लमुखाम्बुज:। भ्रातॄन्दिग्विजयेक्काविष्णुंतेजोपबृ॰हितान्।श्र।
सहदेवं दक्षिणस्यामादिशत् सह सृञ्जयै: । दिशि प्रतीच्यां नकुलमुदीच्यां Tt सव्यसाचिनम् |
प्राच्यां वृकोदरं मत्स्यै: केकयै: सह मद्रकै: ।१३॥

ते विजित्य नृफावीराआजह्नुर्किम्यऔजसा।अजातज्ञन्नवे qf द्रविणं qa aad ।१४॥

श्रुत्वाजितं जरासन्धं नृपतेर्ध्ययतो aft: area तमेवाद्य seal यमुवाच Ful

dese: कृष्णो ब्रह्मलिङ्गधरास्त्रय: । जग्मुर्गिरिव्रजं तात बृहद्रथसुतो यत: 188

ते गत्वाऽऽतिथ्यवेलार्यां गृहेषु गृहमेधिनम्। ब्रह्मण्यं समयाचेरन् राजन्या ब्रह्मलिङ्घिन: । १७1

राजन् विद्ध्यतिथीन् प्राप्तानर्थिनो दूरमागतान्। तन्न: प्रयच्छ भद्रं ते यद् वयं कामयामहे ।१८॥

fe ot तितिक्षूणां किमकार्यमसाधुभि: । f न देयं वदान्यानां क: पर: समदर्शिनाम् । १९॥

चोऽनित्येन wih wat गेयं यज्ञो धरुवम्। नाचिनोति स्वयं कल्प: स वाच्य: शयोच्य एव स: [Rol

हरिश्चद्रौ रन्तिदेव sais: शिबिर्बलि: । व्याध: कपोतो बहवो ह्यश्रुवेण ध्रुवं गता: ।२१॥

Sri Suka continued : Pariksit, hearing these words of the Almighty Lord, King
Yudhisthira was extremely delighted. His face became cheerful like a fresh-blown lotus. He
commissioned all his brothers to conquer the earth. Bhagavan Sri Krsna infused His energy
into the Pandavas and made them unconquerable. (12) King Yudhisthira sent his youngest
brother Sahadeva alongwith Srijaya warriors to conquer the southern regions; he deputed
Nakula alongwith the Matsyas to the west, Arjuna and the Kekayas to the north, and Bhima,
accompanied by the Madras, to the east. (13) O King, conquering all the kings by dint of their
prowess, these warriors brought untold riches from the various quarters to king Yudhisthira
whowas preparing for the sacrifice. (14) When Yudhisthira heard that Jarasandha remained
unsubdued, he became moody and began to muse. Bhagavan Sri Krsna then laid before him
the plan suggested by Uddhava: so the tradition goes. Thereupon Bhimasena, Arjuna and
Bhagavan Sri Krsna assumed the guise of Brahmanas and went to Girivraja (the modern
Giridih), the capital of Jarasandha. (15-1 6) King Jarasandha was a devotee ofthe Brahmanas
and scrupulous in the observance of the sacred duty of a householder. The three Ksatriyas
disguised as Brahmanas went to Jarasandha's palace at the hour appointed for the
entertainment of unexpected guests. There they made their request to Jarasandha as
follows. (17) "O king, may you be blessed. Know us (three) to be your guests come froma
long distance. We have come with a definite purpose; therefore, please grant us our
request.(18) O king, a forbearing person can bear anything; the wicked can do-anything; (in
fact, there is nothing which he will regard as prohibited); and a generous donor will not

hesitate to give away anything. And none is foreign to aman of undifferentiating outlook. (19)
Ifacapable men, through his mortal body, does notearn enduring fame, worthy of being sung
