«Dis. 74] BOOK TEN 431

SORE 89 SE on SORT I OT fg gE er fre Se cee त TT

King Yudhisthira submitted : Krsna, Lords of the three worlds like Brahma and
Sarikara, and guardians of the world like Indra bow their heads to Your command whenever
they obtain the rare privilege of receivingit. (2) O infinite Lord, though extremely humble and
wretched, we are conceited enough to regard ourselves as kings and rulers. Yet (instead of
degrading us) You submit to our authority and carry out our commands. O lotus-eyed Lord,
this is nothing but imitation on Your part of the ways of men. (3) Just as the brilliance of the
sun is neither enhanced nor suffers diminution with the ascent or decline of the sun, even
so Your doings in no way exalt You or detract from Your glory. For You are the Supreme
Spirit, the one Absolute without a second. (4) O unconquerable Lord, thoughts of diversity
like" | and Mine" and "Thou and Thine" obtain only among the ignorant. Such crooked notions
of difference do not find place even in Your devotees, much less in You. Whatever You do
is, therefore, nothing but Your Sport. (5) 7

इत्युक्त्वा चज्ञिवे काले वव्रे युक्तान् स ऋत्विज: | कृष्णानुमोदित: पार्थो ब्राह्मणान् ब्रह्मवादिन: । ६ ।
द्वैपायनो भरद्वाज:र सुमन्तुर्गौतमोऽसित: । वसिष्ठश्च्यवन: कण्वो मैत्रेय: Haute: । ७ |
विश्वामित्रो वामदेव: सुमतिर्जेमिनि: made: cet गर्गो aoe एव च । ८ ।
अथर्वा कश्यपो धौम्बो रामो भार्गव आसुरि: । वीतिहोत्रो मधुच्छन्दा वीरसेनोऽकृतव्रण: । ९ ।
उपहूतास्तथा चान्ये द्रोणभीष्मकृपादय: | yaa: सहसुतो विदुरश्च महामति: 1201
ब्राह्मणा: क्षत्रिया Seat: Yet यज्ञदिदृक्षव: । Aa: सर्वराजानो राज्ञां प्रकृतयो नृप ।११॥

Sri Suka resumed : Saying so, and with Bhagavan Sri Krsna’s concurrence, King
Yudhisthira invited atan hour propitious for the sacrifice Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and
proficient in the Vedic ritual to officiate as priests etc., at the sacrifice. (6) They were Sri
Krsnadwaipayana Vyasa, Bharadwaja, Sumantu, Gautama, Asita, Vasistha, Cyavana,
Kanva, Maitreya, Kavasa, Trita, Viswamitra, Vamadeva, Sumati, Jaimini, Kratu, Paila,
Paragara, Garga and Vaigampayana, Atharva, Kasyapa, Dnaumya, Paragurama, Sukracarya,
Asuri, Vitihotra, Madhutchanda, Virasena and Akrtavrana. (7—9) Besides these, he also
invited Dronacarya, Bhisma, Krpacarya and others, (as well as) Dhrtarastra with all his sons
and the noble-minded Vidura to come and help in the performance. (10) In order to witness
the great sacrifice many princes with their ministers and chief officers, Brahmanas,
Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and Stdras, arrived at Indraprastha, 0 king ! (11)

ततस्ते देवयजनं mao: स्वर्णलाङ्गलै: 1g तत्र यथाम्नायं दीक्षयाञ्चक्रिरे नृपम् 1221
en: किलोपकरणा वरुणस्य चथा पुरा।इन्द्रदयो लोकपाला विरिञ्चभवसंयुता: 128
सगणा: सिद्धगन्धर्वा विद्याधरमहोरया:। मुनयो यक्षरक्षांसि खगकिन्नरचारणा: ।१४॥
राजानश्च समाहूता राजपत्न्यश्च सर्वश:। राजसूवं समीयु: स्म राज्ञ: पाण्डुसुतस्य वै ॥१५॥
मेनिरे कृष्णभक्तस्य सूपपन्नमविस्मिता:। अयाजयन् महाराजं याजका देववर्चस: |
राजसूयेन विधिवत् प्राचेतसमिवामरा: 1261
सुत्येऽहन्यवनीपालो चाजकान् सदसस्पतीन्। अपूजयन् महाभागान् यथावत् सुसमाहित: । १७।
Then the priests ploughed the sacrificial ground with ploughs of gold and initiated
Yudhisthira, according to the scriptural injunctions, as the sacrificer. (12) The utensils used
in this sacrifice were all made of gold as they were in the sacrifice performed by Varuna in
ancient times. Brahma, Sankara, Indra and other guardians of the world, Siddhas and

Gandharvas with their retinues, Vidyadharas and Nagas, sages, Yaksas and Raksasas,
birds, Kinnaras, Caranas and powerful princes with their queens—all came to attend the
