54 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13

BORO ROEDER BERR RR SEER ET IEEE ROR ROE ROMER REO RI ROTOTOR RR OIOR SEDER IOS ROR RI RR BORE HE ORR RR Rr EWR ORO Re ROR RO ROR SOR RT detest
ज्र्त्त

as the sustenance of the bigger ones. (In this way) life sustains life. (46) All this, O king,
is the one self-effulgent Lord, the Self of all embodied souls. It is He who appears as the
subject and the object. Perceive Him as manifested in multitudinous forms through Maya
(illusion). (47) It is He, O mighty ruler—the same Lord who brings into being this living
creation—who has now appeared on this earth as living Death (Kala) for the extermination
of the enemies of gods. (48) The work of the gods has now been (well-nigh) accomplished
and the Lord awaits the completion of that which yet remains to be done. You too should
wait so long as the Lord is still here: (49)

धृतराष्ट्र: सह Wat गान्धार्या च स्वभार्यया। दक्षिणेन हिमवत ऋॠषीणामाश्रमं गत: ।५०॥
स्रोतोभि: सप्तभिर्या वै स्वर्धुनी agen व्यधात्। सप्तानां प्रीतये नाना सप्तस्रोत: प्रचक्षते । ५१॥
स्नात्वानुसवनं तस्मिन्हुत्वा चाग्नीन्यथाविधि | अब्भक्ष उपञ्ञान्तात्मा स आस्ते विगतैषण: 1421
जितासनो जितश्चास: प्रत्याहृतषडिन्दिय: | हरिभावनया ध्वस्तरज:सत्त्वतमोमल: । ५३ |
विज्ञानात्मनि संयोज्य aad प्रविलाप्य तम् । ब्रह्मण्यात्मानमाधारे घटाम्बरमिवाम्बरे 14% |
ध्वस्तमायागुणोदर्को निरुद्धकरणाहाय: | निवर्तिताखिलाहार आस्ते स्थाणुरिवाचल: |
तस्यान्तरायो मैवाभू: संन्यस्ताखिलकर्मण: । ५५॥
स वा Wate राजन् परत: पञ्चमेऽहनि । कलेवरं ma स्वं तच्च भस्मीभविष्यति ug!
दह्यमानेऽग्निभिर्देहे पत्यु: पत्नी सहोटजे।अहि: fern oft साध्वी तमग्निमनुवेक्ष्यति । ५७।
विदुरस्तु तदाश्चर्यं निशाम्य peer हर्षशोकयुतस्तस्माद् गन्ता तीर्थनिषेवक: ruc
इत्युक्त्वाथारुहत् स्वर्गं ame: सहतुम्बुरु: । युधिष्ठिरो वचस्तस्य de कृत्वाजहाक्छुच: । ५९॥
इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां प्रथमस्कन्धे नैमिषीयोपाख्याने त्रयोदञ्लोऽध्याय: 1231
“Dhrtarastra with his younger brother and his own wife, Gandhari, has gone to the
hermitage of sages to the south of the Himalayas, where the Ganga (the celestial river) has
for the pleasure of the seven celebrated sages (Saptarsis as they are called) split herself into
seven streams to flow through seven different channels, which they call Saptasrota.(50-51)
Bathing in the Saptasrota thrice a day (in the morning and evening as well as at midday), and
pouring oblations into the sacred fire according to the scriptural ordinance, he is living on water
alone, serene of mind and free from all cravings. (52) Having controlled his pose (sitting in
one pose continually for hours together) and breath and withdrawn his six senses (the five
external senses and the mind, which is known as the sixth or internal sense) from their
objects, he has shaken off through contemplation on Sri Hari the impurities of his mind in the
shape of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. (53) Nay, merging his ego (sense of I-ness or
individuality) in Buddhi (the principle of intelligence and the source of |-consciousness) and
dissolving his Buddhi in the individual soul (the Ksetrajna as it is called), he has identified
his individual soul with the Absolute (Brahma), the substratum of all, as the space within a
jar is united with the unlimited space. (54) Again, having thoroughly controlled his senses
and mind, he has given up all enjoyment and uprooted the effects (in the shape of latent
desires) of the Gunas of Maya. Nay, having abandoned all his duties, he sits motionless like
a post now. Therefore, do not stand in his way (by trying to contact him). (55) On the fifth day
hence, O king, he will cast off his body, which will be reduced to ashes. (56) Finding the body
of her lord being consumed along with the hut (he is occupying) by the sacrificial fires, his
virtuous wife, standing outside, will enter the fire in order to follow her husband. (57) And,
witnessing this wonder with a mixed feeling of joy and grief, O delight of the Kurus, Vidura
will go out (again) on pilgrimage to sacred places." (58) Having told him all this, the sage
Narada with Tumburu immediately ascended to heaven; and, treasuring up his words in his
