118 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7

MERE RE RE BOR HONE RENT RT HT HTT HET BT SEED ETT ET RR EE EEE RHE EHS HT HM HP bial

व nner ne EEE ————e—_V_—_VOr er _s Sow

Uddhava, Vibhisana, Hanuman, Upendradaitta (Suka), Arjuna (Prtha's son), Arstisena,
Vidura and Srutadeva know His Maya. (48—45) Women and Sidras (members of the
labouring and artisan classes) as well as the Hiinas and Sabaras and those leading a sinful
life, nay, even lower animals such as birds and beasts who have been taught to imbibe the
virtues of the Lord's devotees, much more those who follow the teachings of the Vedas, are
able to realize the true nature of the Lord's Maya and cross the same. (46)

शब्दो न यत्र पुरुकारकवान् क्रियार्थो माया परैत्यभिमुखे च विलज्जमाना ।४७।

we नियम्य यतयो यमकर्तहेतिं wg: स्वराडिवि निपानखनित्रमिन्द्र: । ४८।

a श्रेयसामपि विभुर्भगवान् यतोऽस्य भावस्वभावविहितस्य सत: प्रसिद्धि: |

देहे स्वधातुविगमेऽनुविशीर्यमाणे व्योमेव तत्र पुरुषो न विशीर्यतेऽज: ।४९॥

The substance of the Supreme Spirit is ever most serene and free from fear and of the
nature of absolute consciousness. It is untainted by Maya, and destitute ofall diversities and
is beyond the real as well as the unreal. It is beyond the reach of words (both sacred and
profane) and transcends the fruit of actions which is attained as a result of diverse course
of discipline. Nay, even Maya, who is ashamed to stand before It, flees away from Its
presence. (47) That is the essential character of the Lord, the Supreme Person, which the
wise realize as Brahma (the Absolute), which is free from sorrow and of the nature of eternal
bliss. Having fixed their mind on Him, ascetics neglect even the means of discarding the
notion of difference (viz., Self-Knowledge), just as Indra, being himself the god of rain, has
no use fora spade which is employed in digging wells. (48) Itisthe Lord, again, who bestows
on man the fruit of his actions; for it is He who inspires all noble acts that are performed in
accordance with the natural disposition of the doer. Even when the body gets dissolved as
a result of its constituents in the form of the elements being disintegrated, the unborn Spirit
dwelling in it does not, any more than the ether interpenetrating it. (49)

सोऽयं तेऽभिहितस्तात भगवान् विश्वभावन: | समासेन हरेर्नान्यदन्यस्मात् सदसच्च यत् । ५०।

इदं भागवतं नाम यन्मे भगवतोदितम् । संग्रहोऽयं विभूतीनां त्वमेतद् विपुलीकुरु ।५१।

यथा हरौ भगवति नॄणां भक्तिर्भविष्यति । सर्वात्मन्यखिलाधारे इति सङ्कल्प्य वर्णय 1421

at वर्णयतोऽमुष्य ईश्वरस्यानुमोदत: | शृण्वत: श्रद्धया Pra माययाऽऽत्मा न मुह्यति । ५३1

इति श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे पारमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वितीयस्कन्धे ब्रह्मनारदसंवादे सप्तमोऽध्याय: ॥७1

Thus have | talked to you in brief, dear child, about the Lord who creates the universe by
His very thought. Whatever there exists as cause or effect is no other than Sri Hari, although
the latter stands even apart from it. (50) This is the ‘Bhagavata' which the Lord was pleased
to teach me. It describes in brief the glories of the Lord : do you now expand it. (51) Proceed
with this work of amplification with a will that men may develop devotion to Lord Sri Hari, the
Universal Spirit andthe Sustainer of all. (52) The mind of the man, who proceeds to describe

the Lord's Maya, or approves of another describing it or reverently hears it described
everyday, is never deluded by Maya. (53)

Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Two, comprising among other things
the dialogue between Brahma and the sage Narada, of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cttrei nets
Pur S ES ore
