282 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 43

ल् MEM PER AL FECES AE EE IRR OE THR EET ES OPTI HERE HSE SH HSM NN A

seated the people of the city and the country, headed by Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, as well
as chiefs and princes on their (respective) thrones. (34) Surrounded by (his) ministers,
Karhsa took his seat on the royal dais in the midst of feudal lords and with a sore aching
heart.(35) Amidst a flourish of trumpets, which was drowned (at intervals) by the clapping of
the wrestlers' arms, proud wrestling champions picturesquely adorned majestically entered
the arena alongwith their masters. (36) Feeling greatly cheered by the stirring (music of the)
trumpets and other instruments—Candra, Mustika, Kuta, Sala and Toéala too, (all) eminent
wrestlers, found their way into the arena. (37) Specially invited by Karhsa (the ruler of the
Bhojas), the aforementioned cowherds headed by Nanda, the chief of the Gopas, who had
(just) offered their presents, took their seats on a (separate) dais. (38)

Thus ends the forty-second discourse entitled “A description of the amphitheatre
for wrestlers (set up by Kariisa)", in the first half of Book Ten of
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana. otherwise known
as the Paramaharnsa-Samhita.

ODS SS OI ODS

अथ त्रिचत्वारिशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XLIl
The elephant Kuvalayapida killed (by the Lord)
श्रीगुक उवाच
अथ कृष्णश्च way Feat परन्तप । मल्लदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषे श्रुत्वा द्रष्टुमुपेयतु: । १ |
बद्ध्वा परिकरं aR: ay कुटिलालकान्। उवाच हस्तिपं वाचा मेघनादगभीरया । ३ ।
अम्बष्ठाम्बष्ठ uni नो देह्यपक्रम मा चिरम्। नो चेत् सकुञ्जरं त्वाद्य नयामि यमसादनम् । ४ ।
एवं निर्भर्त्सतोऽग्बष्ठ: कुपित: कोपितं गजम्। चोदयामास कृष्णाय कालान्तकयमोपमम् । ५ |
संक्रुद्धस्तमचक्षाणो wee: स केञवम्। परामृशत् पुष्करेण स प्रसह्य विनिर्गत: । ७ |
पुच्छे प्रगृह्यातिबलें धनुष: पञ्चविंश्चातिम्। विचकर्षं यथा नागं qui ga लीलया । ८ |
स पर्यावर्तमानेन सव्यदक्षिणतोऽच्युत: | बभ्राम भ्राम्यमाणेन गोवत्सेनेव बालक: । ९ ।
ततोऽभिमुखमभ्येत्य पाणिनाऽऽहत्य वारणम्। SIS पातयामास स्पृश्यमान: पदे UE IROL
स धावन् HIST भूमौ पतित्वा सहसोत्थित: | तं मत्वा पतितं Hal दन्ताभ्यां सोऽहनत्कषितिम् 122 1
स्वविक्रमे प्रतिहते कुञ्जरेन्दोत्यमर्षित: । चोद्यमानो महामात्रै: कृष्णमभ्यद्रवद् रुषा । १२॥
त्तमापतन्तमासाद्य भगवान् मधुसूदन:। निगृह्य पाणिना हस्तं पातयामास भूतले 1831

पतितस्य पदाऽऽक्रम्य gre इव लीलया । दन्तमुत्पाट्य तेनेभं हस्तिपांश्चाहनद्धरि: । १४॥
$11 Suka began again : Having finished Their bath etc., the next day, and hearing the
loud noise of the wrestlers and the din of kettledrums, O chastiser of foes, Sri Krsna and
Balarama went to see the tournament. (1) Having duly reached the entrance of the
