136 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

SERS SESSM ERTL O NENT NNTMRTRT RETNA NORM ENHN OAK ECE REENEHNEHONAHEREKONnnnecnennuneneiig +

house) a crying (by pinching them). (29) Where the milk etc., is kept (in swings etc.)hanging
beyond the reach of his hands, he contrives plans (to get at it) with the help of wooden seats
and mortars etc., (placed one upon another). Possessed of insight into the contents (of the
pots) and expert in (the art of) making holes, he strikes holes into the pots placed in swings
(where the aforesaid expedients fail). In a dark room he uses his own person, wearing hosts
of gems, as a lamp to reveal things and he does all this at a time when the cowherd women
have their mind fully engrossed in their household duties. (30) He commits nuisance in our
tidy houses and does other such mischievous acts. And having accomplished his work
through pilfering devices, he sits (by your side) as a very innocent boy.” Yasoda, to whom
the matter was thus reported at length by the (cowherd) women—who watched the charming
countenance (of Sri Krsna) gazing With terrified eyes—did not feel inclined (even) to rebuke
her son and stood with a laughing face. (31)

एकदा क्रीडमानास्ते रामाद्या गोपदारका: | कृष्णो मृदं भक्षितवानिति मात्रे न्यवेदयन् 1321

सा गृहीत्वा at कृष्णमुपालभ्य हितैषिणी । यञ्ञोदा भयसम्भ्रान्तप्रेक्षणाक्षमभाषत ।३३॥

कस्मान्मृदमदान्तात्मन् भवान् भक्षितवान् रह: । वदन्ति तावका ह्येते कुमारास्तेऽग्रजोऽप्ययम् 13% |
One day, while at play, the cowherd boys headed by Balarama complained to Yasoda
(the mother of Sri Krsna), that Krsna had eaten earth. (32) Taking Sri Krsna by the hand and
chiding him, the said Yagoda, who sought his welfare and found that His eyes cast a
bewildered look, spoke to Him (as follows):—(33) "Why did you eat earth surreptitiously, 0

unruly child ? Indeed these boys, your playmates, as well as this elder brother of yours say
so." (34)

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच

नाहं भक्षितवानम्ब सर्वे प्रिथ्यग्भिज्ञंसिन:।यद्रिसत्यप्सिस्तर्हिप्तपक्षंपश्यमॆपुंखम्|३५|
add तर्हि व्यादेहीत्युक्त: स भगवान् eft: | व्यादत्ताव्याहतैश्चर्य: क्रीडामनुजबालक: 13.5 |
AI aa aga fad soa weg a a fea: 1 anfediafenpics सवाय्वग्नीन्दुतारकम् 13191
Sifaan atch act ser fete a1 danftelifsenion wt ora ques: 1321

wet वीक्ष्य विदारितास्ये व्रजं सहात्मानमवाप शङ्काम् । ३९॥

किं स्वप्न एतदुत देवमाया किं वा मदीयो aa बुद्धिमोह: ।

wal अमुष्यैव ममार्भकस्य य: कश्चनौत्पत्तिक आत्मयोग: ।४०॥

अथो यथावन्न वितर्कगोचरं चेतोमन:कर्मवचोभिरञ्जसा ।

यदाश्रयं येन यत: प्रतीयते सुदुर्विभाव्यं प्रणतास्मि तत्पदम् Se |

अहं ममासौ पतिरेष मे सुतो व्रजेश्वरस्याखिलवित्तपा सती ।

गोप्यश्च गोपा: सहगोधनाश्च मे wate कुमति: a मे गति: ives
ya विदिततत्त्वायां गोपिकायां स ईश्वर: । वैष्णवीं व्यतनोन्मायां पुत्रस्नेहमयीं faq: 1631
सद्योनष्टस्मृतिर्गोपी साऽऽरोप्यारोहमात्मजम् | प्रवृद्धस्नेहकलिलहृदयाऽऽसीद् यथा पुरा ।४४॥
त्र्या चोपनिषद्धिश्च सांख्ययोगैश्च सात्वतै: | उपगीयमानमाहात्म्यं aR सामन्यतात्मजम् ।४५॥

Sri Krsna replied : | never ate earth, O mother! They are all liars. If (itis urged) they are
