Dis. 9 ] BOOK ONE 33

HBGKRKHKAKTLREKAHHHSCHHKAATORHLA AHH ही TELS BANA HENAN EHH YAH हीं ह RHEE ORO ATR HH

decked with gold and driven by excellent horses, as also the sages Vyasa, Dhaumya (the.
family priest of Yudhisthira) and others. (2) Lord Sri Krsna Himself, O Saunaka, rode in a
Chariot along with Dhanafjaya (Arjuna, so-called because of his having fetched as a tribute
from his enemies untold riches for Yudhisthira, thereby enabling him to perform his famous
Rajasuya sacrifice, which earned him the title of Emperor). Accompanied by them, king
Yudhisthira shone brightly like Kubera (the Chief of the Yaksas, a class of demigods) in the
midst of Guhyakas (Yaksas). (3) Perceiving Bhisma lying on the ground like a god fallen from
heaven, the Pandavas and their attendants as well as Sri Krsna made obeisance to him. (4)
At that time, O Saunaka, Brahmana sages, celestial sages and royal sages, all had
assembled there in order to see Bhisma (the foremost of the Bharatas). (5) Parvata, Narada,
Dhaumya, the divine Badarayana (Vedavyasa), Brhadaswa, Bharadwaja, Parasurama (the
son of Renuka) with his pupils, Vasistha, Indrapramada, Trita, Grtsamada, Asita, Kaksivan,
Gautama and Atri, Viswamitra (a scion of Kusika), Sudargana and other holy sages like
Brahmarata (Suka) and evenso KasSyapa, Angirasa and others arrived with their pupils, 0
Saunaka. (6—8) Seeing those highly blessed souls assembled there, Bhisma* (the
foremost of the Vasus, a class of gods) who was well-versedin the principles of right conduct
paid his respect to them with due regard to the occasion and place. (9) Bhisma was also
acquainted with the glory of Sri Krsna, the Lord of the universe, who had sat before him in
a personal form assumed through Maya, and was also enthroned in his heart, and he paid
his homage to Him. (10)

पाण्डुपुत्रानुपासीनान् प्रश्रयप्रेमसङ्घतान्। अभ्याचष्टानुरागास्रैरन्धीभूतेन चक्षुषा ILRI

ae कष्टमहोऽन्याय्यं यद्यूयं धर्मनन्दना: । जीवितुं ade fee विप्रधर्माच्युताश्रया: 1221

संस्थितेऽतिरथे पाण्डौ पृथा बालप्रजा AY: । युष्मत्कृते बहून् क्लेशान् प्राप्ता तोकवती मुहु: 123 |

wa कालकृतं WY भवतां च यदप्रियम्। सपालो यद्वशे लोको वायोरिव घनावलि: ।१४॥

यत्र धर्मसुतो राजा गदापाणिर्वृकोदर: । कृष्णोऽस्त्री गांण्डिवंचापं सुहृत्कृष्णस्ततो विपत् । १५1

न ह्यस्य कर्हिचिद्राजन् पुमान् ae विधित्सितम् । यद्विजिज्ञासया युक्ता मुह्यन्ति कवयोऽपि fe । १६॥

तस्मादिदं दॆवतन्त्रं व्यवस्य भरतर्षभ । तस्यानुविहितोऽनाथा नाथ पाहि प्रजा: प्रभो । १७

Eyes blinded with tears of affection, Bhisma looked at the sons of Pandu, who sat beside

him, full of modesty and love, and spoke to them as follows :—(11) "How painful and how
unjust it has been that you, the progeny of righteousness, and votaries of the Brahmanas,
Dharma (goodness) and Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna) should have lived a life of suffering, which
you surely did not deserve. (12) When the great warrior Pandu breathed his last, you were
all tender of age, and my daughter-in-law, Prtha, along with you, her children, had to suffer
many hardships on your account more than once. (13) | believe that all your unwelcome
experiences were attributable to Time (Providence); for the whole world with its guardian
deities is ruled over by Time evenas the clouds are by the wind. (14) Where king Yudhisthira,
the son of Dharma was the ruler, Bhima held the mace in his hand, Arjuna was the archer
and Gandiva the bow, and where Sri Krsna was the friend and well-wisher,to think of
adversity even there ! (15) Indeed no man, O king, can ever discover the intention of Sri
Krsna; even seers get bewildered in their seeking to find it out. (16) Therefore, knowing it for
certain that all these events depend on the will of Providence, O chief of the Bharatas, follow
His will, O ruler of men, and protect the helpless people as you are their sole monarch. (17)

एष वै भगवान् साक्षादाद्यो नारायण: पुमान्। मोहयन्मायया लोकं गूढश्चरति वृष्णिषु ize!
अस्यानुभावं भगवान् a गुह्यतमं fra: । देवर्षिर्नारद: marae कपिलो नृप ।१९।

* The Mahabharata tells us that Bhisma was an incarnation of Dyauh, the formost of the eight Vasus.
