Dis. 23 ] BOOK ELEVEN 625

न व eeeT TST TTT rir it trite tiki te te ee ee eed

स चाहेदमहो we वृथाऽऽत्मा मेऽनुतापित: । न धर्माय न ara यस्यार्थायास gga: । १४॥
प्रायेणार्था: कदर्याणां न सुखाय कदाचन।इह चात्मोपतापाय मृतस्य नरकाय च ।१५॥
यज्ञो यदस्विनां शुद्धं Foran ये गुणिनां गुणा: । लोभ: स्वल्पोऽपि तान् हन्ति श्वित्रो रूपमिवेप्सितम् । १६1
अर्थस्य साधने fag set रक्षणे व्यये । aid आयासस्त्रासश्चिन्ता भ्रमो yom ies!
स्तेयं हिंसानृतं ae: काम: क्रोध: स्मयो मद: । भेदो वैरमविश्वास: संस्पर्धा व्यसनानि च ।१८॥
एते पञ्चदलानर्था ह्यर्थमूला मता नॄणाम्।तस्मादनर्थमर्थाख्यं श्रेयोऽर्थी दूरतस्त्यजेत् ।१९॥
भिद्यन्ते wet am: पितर: सुहृदस्तथा । एकास्रिग्धा:काकिणिना ae: सर्वेऽय: कृता: 1201
अर्थेनाल्पीयसा ह्येते संरब्धा दीप्तमन्यव: । त्यजन्त्याशु wet wha सहसोत्सृज्य सोहदम् । २१।
लुब्ध्वा जन्मामरप्रार्थ्य मानुष्यं aa द्विजाग्र्यताम् । तदनादृत्य ये स्वार्थं घ्नन्ति यान्त्यशुभां गतिम् । २२।
स्वर्गापवर्गयोर्द्धरे प्राप्य लोकमिमं पुमान्।द्रविणे कोऽनुषज्जेत मर्तयोऽनर्थस्य धामनि 1231
देवर्षिपितृभूतानि ज्ञातीन् बन्धूंश्च wits: असंविभज्य चात्मानं यक्षवित्त: पतत्यध: ।२४।
व्यर्थयार्थेहया fi प्रमत्तस्य वयो sem कुशला aa सिध्यन्ति जरठ: किं नु साधये 1२५1
कस्मात् संक्लिश्यते विद्वान् व्यर्थयार्थेहयासकृत्। कस्यचिन्मायया नूनं लोकोऽयं सुविमोहित: 1261
fe धनैर्धनदैर्वा किं कामैर्वा कामदैरुत । मृत्युना ग्रस्यमानस्य कर्मभिर्वोत जन्मदै: 1201

And he said (to himself) as follows:— "Oh, what a pity | In vain has this body been
subjected to suffering by me, who took such (great) pains over (the acquisition of) wealth
neither for religious merit nor for self-gratification ! (14) Generally the riches of misers never
contribute to their (bodily) comfort (or happiness). In this life, on the other hand, they conduce
to the agony of their soul; and when a miser is no more (in this world) they lead him to hell
(as a result of neglect of his obligatory and other duties). (15) Just as white leprosy spoils an
exterior worth coveting, even a little greed mars the immaculate glory of the glorious and the
laudable qualities that exist in those possessing merit. (16) Bodily exertion, apprehension,
anxiety and delusion fall to the lot of men engaged in the acquisition of wealth, in augmenting
and preserving it once it has been acquired, and anxiety (grief alone) is involved in its
expenditure, loss and enjoyment. (17) (Moreover) since the tendency to misappropriate
others’ property, violence, mendacity, hypocrisy, covetousness and anger, pride, arrogance,
discord, animosity, distrust, a spirit of rivalry and fondness for women in general, love of
gambling and addiction to wine—these fifteen evils found in men are believed to have their
source in wealth; therefore, a seeker of (final) beatitude should abandon from a distance the
evil going by the name of wealth (lit., that which is solicited). (18-19) (One's own) brothers,
wife, parents and uncles as well as one's near and dear ones, who were (once) full of love,
nay, had identity of interest, are all estranged in no time by #single shell and converted into
enemies. (20) Agitated and incensed over the question of the least wealth, these people cast
at once (all) affection to the winds and, full of jealousy, forsake in no time and (even) take
the life of their rival. (21) They who, having secured a human birth—worthy of being solicited
even by immortals—and there too the status of a Brahmana, the foremost of the twice-born,
and yet ignoringit, mar (fail to achieve) their self-interest (in the shape of final beatitude) meet
with an evil destiny (go down to hell as a result of their addiction to the evils enumerated in
verse 18 above). (22) Having obtained this (human) body, the gateway to heaven as well as
to final beatitude, what mortal man would get attached to wealth, the abode of (all) evil ? (23)
He who guards his wealth like a Yaksa, neither propitiates (by means of it) the gods, the Rsis,
the manes and (other) living beings kinsmen, relatives and other claimants nor himself and
goes down (to perdition). (24) My fortune, lifetime and strength, through which men of

