494 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15

RHAAHHAA LETTS EEA OAH TEESE कोत्रो HEHEHE LECH SELENE EMH ELENA EAH

अथ पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:

Discourse XV
An account of Priyavrata's posterity continued
श्रीशुक उवाच
भरतस्यात्मज: सुमतिर्नामाभिहितो aq ह वाव केचित्पाखण्डिन ऋषभपदवीमनुवर्तमानं चानार्यां
अवेदसमाम्नातां Saat स्वमनीषया पापीयस्या कलौ कल्पयिष्यन्ति। १ । तस्माद् वृद्धसेनायां देवताजिन्नाम
पुत्रोऽभवत्। २ । अथासुर्यां तत्तनयो देवद्युम्नस्ततो धेनुमत्यां सुत: परमेष्ठी तस्य सुवर्चलायां प्रतीह SISTA: | ३।
य आत्मविद्यामाख्याय tad संशुद्धो महापुरुषमनुसस्मार। «I प्रतीहात्सुवर्चलायां प्रतिहरत्रादयस्त्रय
आसन्निज्याकोविदा: सूनव: प्रतिहर्तु: स्तुत्यामजभूमानावजनिषाताम् | ५ | भूम्न ऋषिकुल्यायामुद्गीथस्तत:
प्रस्तावो देवकुल्यायां प्रस्तावान्नियुत्सायां हृदयज आस्रीद्विभुर्विभो Tat च पृथुषेणस्तस्मान्नक्त आकूत्यां
जज्ञेनक्तप्द्द्रुतिमुत्रोगयाराजर्षिफ्याक्काश्नवाअक्यामाश्लाद्भगबता विष्णोर्जगद्रिरक्षिषया
गृहीतसत्त्वस्य कलाऽऽत्मवत्त्वादिलक्षणेन महापुरुषतां प्राप्त:।६॥। स a स्वधर्मेण

प्रजापालनपोषणप्रीणनोपलालनानुशासनलक्षणेनेज्यादिना च भगवति महापुरुषे परावरे ब्रह्मणि
सर्वात्मनार्पितपरमार्थलक्षणेन ब्रह्मविच्चरणानुसेवयाऽऽपादितभगवद्भक्तियोगेन चाभीक्ष्णश:
परिभावितातिशुद्धमतिरुपरतानात्म्य आत्मनि स्वयमुपलभ्यमानब्रह्मात्मानुभवोऽपि निरभिमान
एवावनिमजूगुपत् | ७।

Sri Suka began again : We have (in VII. 3 above) already spoken about the (eldest) son
of Emperor Bharata, Sumati by name, who followed in the footsteps of Lord Rsabha (lived
the life of an ascetic who had shaken off all worldly feeling and obligation) and whom certain
heretics, having no respect for Vedic traditions, will set up according to their own perverted
intellect in the Kali age as a deity not mentioned in the Vedas (the Vedic pantheon). (1) A
son, Devatajit (a conqueror of the gods by name, was born to him through (his wife)
Vrddhasena. (2) Then through Asuri (Devatdjit's wife) sprang up his son, Devadyumna; from
Devadyumna, through Dhenumati, was born a son, Paramesthi (by name); (and) from the
loins of Paramesthi, through Suvarcala, was born Pratiha, who, having taught self-
knowledge (to, many) and himself thoroughly purified (thereby), realized the Supreme
Person as his own self. (3-4) From (the loins of) Pratiha, through (his wife, also known as)
Suvarcala, sprang up three sons, Pratiharta and so on (the other two being known by the
names of Prastota and Udgata), who were (all) well-versed in (performing) sacrifices; and
from Pratiharta, through Stuti, were born (two sons) Aja and Bhima (by name). (5) From (the
loins of) Bhima, through Rsikulya, sprang up Udgitha; from Udgitha, through Devakulya,
was born Prastava; from Prastava, through Niyutsa, sprang up his son, Vibhu; from Vibhu,
again, through Rati, followed Prthusena; from Prthusena, through Akuti, was born Nakta;
and from (the loins of) Nakta sprang up the illustrious Gaya, son of Druti, the foremost among
royal sages anda ray of Lord Visnu Himself—who has assumed the quality of Sattva (a form
consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) with intent to protect the universe—
Gaya, who attained to the rank of an exalted soul by virtue of (his) self-possession and other
attributes. (6) He had his mind repeatedly chastened and rendered extremely pure through
(the disinterested performance of) his own duty—in the shape of looking after, providing with
means of subsistence, humouring, treating with tenderness and admonishing the people
and undertaking sacrifices and other pious acts in a spirit of complete dedication to Lord
Visnu (the Supreme Person), whois higher than the highest (Brahma, Siva and others) and
no other than Brahma (the Infinite) which had rendered it capable of yielding the highest
results (viz., final beatitude, the supreme object of human pursuit), as well as through the
habit of Devotion to the Lord, acquired by constantly adoring the feet of those who have

