Dis. 17] BOOK FOUR 367

SRA MTLERALES A EKHKKAEKKS Cee ePeeehherereshane HEKTHCHEW CECT ELEKHeHHAKKAHAKRHKEHe Hee O Skew

लोके नाविन्दत ant वैन्यान्मृत्योरिव प्रजा:। त्रस्ता तदा fags हृदयेन विदूयता । १७
उवाच च महाभागं धर्मज्ञापन्नवत्सल | त्राहि मामपि भूतानां पालनेऽवस्थितो भवान् । १८॥
स त्वं जिघांससे कस्माद्दीनामकृतकिल्बिषाम्। अहनिष्यत्कथं योषां धर्मज्ञ sft यो मत: ee!
प्रहरन्ति न वै स्वीषु कृतागस्स्वपि arma: किमुत aiken राजन् करुणा दीनवत्सला: 1201
मां विपाट्याजरां नावं यत्र fad प्रतिष्ठितम्। आत्मानं च प्रजाश्चेमा: कथमम्भसि धास्यसि । २१।
Maitreya went on : On hearing the piteous lament of the people, 0 chief of the Kurus,
Prthu pondered long and (at last) was able to perceive the cause (of the disappearance of
foodgrains, viz., that Earth herself had heldup the foodgrains within her bosom). (12) Having
arrived at the above conclusion by force of reason, he took up his bow, and in great
indignation fitted an arrow to it, aiming it at Earth, even as Lord Siva (the Destroyer of Tripura
or three towns built of gold, silver andiron in the heavens, air and earth by the demon Maya)
aimed His shaft (at Tripura). (13) Seeing him with an uplifted weapon, Earth began to tremble
and, assuming the form of a cow, ran in terror like a doe chased by a hunter. (14) His eyes
turned crimson with wrath, the son of Vena thereupon followed her, with the arrow fitted to
his bow, whithersoever she ran (for shelter). (15) Running towards the various quarters
(north, east, south and west) and intermediate quarters (north-east, south-east, south-west
and north-west) as well as towards heaven and earth and the region lying between the two,
the goddess (Earth) saw him with an uplifted bow wherever she went. (16) She obtained no
asylum against the son of Vena even as created beings find no immunity from death. Then
with a sore heart she returned (much) terrified and said to the noble king: "O Knower of
Dharma (the secret of piety), kind to the afflicted, protect me as well, intent as you are on the
maintenance of living beings. (17-18) Such as you are, wherefore do you seek to kill me, a
meek and innocent creature? How would he who is acknowledged as a knower of Dharma
take the life of a female? (19) People do not strike the fair sex even though they have
committed an offence. Much less would men like you, who are so gracious and fond of the
miserable, stoop to such a thing. (20) Having destroyed me, an undecaying boat on which
the whole-universe rests, how would you be able to support yourself as well as (all) these
created beings on the surface of water ? (21)

पृथुरुवाच

वसुधे wt वधिष्यामि मच्छासनपराङ्मुखीम्। ant बर्हिषि या वृङ्क्ते न तनोति च नो वसु । २२।

यवसं जग्ध्यनुदिनं नैव दोग्ध्यौधसं पय: । तस्यामेवं हि दुष्टायां दण्डो नात्र न स्यते । २३|

त्वं खल्वोषधिबीजानि see सृष्टानि स्वयम्भुवा । न मुञ्चस्यात्मरुद्धानि मामवज्ञाय मन्दधी: । २४॥

अमूषां क्षुत्परीतानामार्तानां परिदेवितम्।मयिष्यामि मद्बाणैर्भिन्नायास्तव मेदसा 1241

पुमान् योषिदुत gta आत्मसम्भावनोऽधम: । भूतेषु निरनुक्रोज्ञो नृपाणां तद्बधोऽवध: 1261

त्वां Wen दुर्मदां नीत्वा मायागां तिलश: at: । आत्मयोगबलेनेमा धारयिष्याम्यहं प्रजा: 1291
Prthu replied : Earth, | shall slay you, who have turned a deaf ear to my commands and
take your share in the sacrificial offerings but refuse to yield us crops. (22) Punishmentis not
unadvisable in the case of the cow which is so wicked that it feeds on fodder everyday but
does not yield the milk of its udders. (23) Foolishly disregarding me, you refuse to release
the foodgrains already created by Brahma (the self-born), and which you have concealed
within your bosom. (24) When your bowels are ripped open by my arrows, | shall be able to

stop the lamentation of these afflicted ones seized with hunger, by (appeasing their appetite
with ) your fat . (25) For the rulers of men, to kill the vile and self-conceited soul—be it man,

