Dis. 28] BOOK THREE 263

SHAE CRAKE HH SOE HK AEE REE HE EH I TT A ERE ORTON

Having controlled one's posture, one should spread a seat (consisting of Kuga grass,
deerskin and so on) in an undefiled spot. And sitting there in an easy posture, keeping the
body erect, one should practise control of breath.(8) (At the very outset) the striver should
clear the passage of the breath by first inhaling the air to his utmost capacity, then holding
the breath and finally exhaling it, or by reversing the process( i. e., by exhaling the air in the
first instance, then holding the breath outside and finally inhaling it), so that the mind may
become steady and free from distraction.(9) Even as gold throws off its dross when heated
(and melted) by the force of air and fire, so the mind of the striver who has controlled his
breath gets purified before long.(10) A striver should (therefore) eradicate the disorders of
the three humours of the body (wind, bile and phlegm) by the (aforesaid three) processes
of breath-control, his sins by concentrating his mind, contacts (with sense-objects) by
withdrawing the senses from their objects and the characteristics which are contrary to the
Lord's divine nature (such as attachment and aversion etc.), by means of meditation. (11)
When his mind gets purified and concentrated by the practice of Yoga, he should meditate
on the form of the Lord (as indicated hereafter) with his gaze fixed on the tip of his nose.(12)

प्रसन्नवद्नाम्भोजं पद्मगर्भारुणेक्षणम् | नीलोत्पलदलश्यामं शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम् । 83 |
लसत्पङ्कजकिञ्जल्कपीतकौरेयवाससम् | श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजत्कौस्तुभामुक्तकन्धरम् । १४॥
मत्तद्बिरेफकलया परीतं वनमालया | परार्घ्यहारवलयकिरीटाङ्गदनूपुरम् । १५॥
काञ्चीगुणोल्लसच्छ्मेणिं हृदयाम्भोजविष्टरम्। eta ma मनोनयनवर्धनम् । १६॥
अपीच्यदर्शनं शश्वत्सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम् । सन्तं वयसि कैशोरे भृत्यानुग्रहकातरम् । १७॥

कीर्तन्यतीर्थयरासं पुण्यर्लोकयशास्करम् | ध्यायेद्देवं समग्राङ्गे यावन्न च्यवते मन: 121
स्थितं व्रजन्तमासीनं Was वा गुहाशायम् । प्रेक्षणीयेहितं ध्यायेच्छुद्धभावेन चेतसा ।१९॥
तस्मिँल्लब्धपदं ft सर्वावयवसंस्थितम्। विलक्ष्यैकत्र संयुज्यादङ्गे भगवतो AP: 101

The Lord has acheertullotus-like countenance, eyes ruddy like the interior of a lotus, and
a body swarthy (of complexion) like the petals of a blue lotus and bearing a conch, discus
and mace (in three of His four hands). (13) He has wrapped round His loins a shining piece
of silk yellow as the filaments of a lotus, bears the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair) on
His bosom and has the brilliant Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck. (14) He also
wears round His neck a garland of syivan flowers, that has attracted a swarm of bees drunk
with its delicious fragrance and sweetly humming about it, andis further adored with a pearl
necklace and a crown, and pairs of armlets, wristlets and anklets, all superb.(15) With His
loins and hips graced by a girdle He stands on the lotus of His devotee’s heart, is most
charming to look at, wears a serene aspect and gladdens the soul and eyes of those who
behold Him.(16) Eternally continuing in the prime of youth, He hasa captivating appearance,
is ever greeted by the entire universe andis impatient to show His grace to His servants.(17)
His glory is worth singing and sanctifies all; nay, He confers glory even on men of sacred
renown (like the demon king Bali). In this way one should meditate on the integral form of
the Lord till the mind does not shake. (18) The pastimes of the Lord are all attractive to the
sight; hence with a mind full of sincere devotion one should visualize Him as standing,
moving, sitting, lying or dwelling in one's heart. (19) Having ascertained that his mind, though
fixed on the aforementioned form of the Lord, only takes a collective view of all His limbs,
the practicant should fix it on each individual limb of the Lord (as follows).(20)

सञ्चिन्तयेद्भगवतश्चरणारविन्दं वज्राङ्कुशाध्वजसरोरुहलाञ्छनाढ्यम् |
उत्तुङ्वरक्तविलसन्नखचक्रवालज्योत्स्वाभिराहतमहद्धृदयान्धकारम् 1221
