Dis. 10]. , BOOK TWELVE 709

RH HIALEAH AAA LIA ADEA MER AGA ESSIEN SRR LT AERA SERIE HASH OHH HE

ऋषिरुवाच

aa ईश्वरलीलेयं eden ङारीरिणाम्। यन्नमन्तीशितव्यानि स्तुवन्ति जगदीश्वरा: ।२८॥
ai md wa: प्रवक्तारश्च देहिनाम्। आचरन्त्यनुमोदन्ते क्रियमाणं स्तुवन्ति च ।२९।
नैतावता भगवत: स्वमायामयवृत्तिभि: । न दुष्येतानुभावस्तैर्मायिन: कुहकं यथा ।३०॥
सृष्टेदे मनसा विश्वमात्मनानुप्रविर्य य: । गुणै: कुर्वद्भिराभाति कर्तेव स्वप्नदृग् यथा ।३१॥
wa नमो भगवते त्रिगुणाय गुणात्मने। केवलायाद्वितीयाय गुर्वे ब्रह्ममूर्तये ।३२॥
& वृणे नु परं भूमन् at we वरदर्शनात् । यद्दर्शनात् पूर्णकाम: सत्यकाम: पुमान् भवेत् । ३३
ata वृणेऽथापि पूर्णात् कामाभिवर्षणात्। भगवत्यच्युतां भक्तिं तत्परेषु तथा त्वयि 1३४॥

The sage submitted: Oh, this pastime of the almighty Lord is difficult to conceive for
embodied creatures (like us), following which Rulers of the universe bow to and glorify those
who deserve to be commanded (by Them) ! (28) In order to teach righteous conduct (to the
people at large) those teachers of embodied beings as general rule not only practise such
conduct (themselves) but also express approbation of and applaud it when practised (by
others). (29) The glory of the almighty Lord {in You) is not (however) marred by such
(exemplary) conduct—in the shape of those actions (such as bowing to us), which are (but)
the operation of Your Maya (enchanting potency)—any more than the enchanting power of
an enchanter by his conjuring tricks. (30) Hail to that almighty Lord (in You), who, having
evolved the universe by His thought (alone) and (then) entered it in the form of the Jiva
(individual soul), appears, like a dreaming man, as the doer through the (three) Gunas
(modes of Prakrti)—which are the (real) agents—and who, though (appearing as) endowed
with the three Gunas, is (yet) their Controller absolute and one without a second, and the
Preceptor (of all) in the form of the Veda ! (31-32) What greater boon shall । ask (of You), O
Perfect One, than Yourse!f, whose (very) sight is blessed (nay,) through whose sight man
bids fair to get sated and become true of resolve ? (33) Nonetheless | ask one boon of You—
who are not only self-sufficient (Yourse!f) but shower blessings (on Your devotees)—viz.,
unfailing devotion to the almighty Lord (Visnu), and those devoted to Him, as well as to
Yourself. (34)

सूत उवाच

इत्यर्चितोऽभिष्टुतश्च मुनिना gma गिरा।तमाह waned: दार्वया चाभिनन्दित: ।३५॥
कामो महर्षे सर्वोऽयं भक्तिमांस्त्वमधोक्षजे। आकल्पान्ताद् Ta: पुण्यमजरामरता तथा । ३६।
ज्ञानं त्रैकालिकं ब्रह्मन् विज्ञानं च विरक्तिमत्। ब्रह्मवर्चस्विनो भूयात् पुराणाचार्यतास्तु 71201

Sita further said : Thus worshipped and glorified by the sage in sweet words, Lord Siva
(the Destroyer of the universe), supported by His Consort too, addressed him (thus):—(35)
"Eull of Devotion as you are to Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), O great sage,
let all this desire (of yours) be fulfilled; let your fame endure till the end of the Kalpa; let
religious merit and immunity from old age and death be enjoyed by you and let knowledge
relating to the past, present and future and Self-Realization coupled with dispassion and
the teachership of a Purana fall to your lot, invested as you are with Brahmanical (spiritual)
glory." (36-37)

Yd उवाच

wa वरान् स मुनये दत्त्वागात्यक्ष ईश्वर: । देव्यै तत्कर्मं कथयन्ननुभूतं पुरामुना ।३८॥
सोऽप्यवाप्तमहायोगमहिमा भार्गवोत्तम: | विचरत्यधुनाप्यद्धा हरावेकान्ततां गत: ।३९॥
अनुवर्णितमेतत्ते मार्कण्डेयस्य धीमत:। अनुभूतं भगवतो मायावैभवमद्भुतम् vo |
