542 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA { Dis. 26

।.७.३.३.७..३.३..३..३.७..७.७.७.७.३.३ १६ ७2७७ ३७३ 5३3३ ६ ६3६ ESTEE EEN HH EE EEE SEKEEKE RES EEEE HELL EEH NEEM २8 प ऽ 828३ ५३८

ऋषिरुवाच
अन्तराल wa त्रिजगत्यास्तु दिशि दक्षिणस्यामधस्ताद्भूमेरुपरिष्टाच्य जलाद्यस्यामग्निष्वात्तादय:
पितृगणा दिशि स्वानां गोत्राणां परमेण समाधिना सत्या एवाशिष आशासाना निवसन्ति। ५ | यत्र ह वाव
amar पितृराजो dace: स्वविषयं प्रापितेषु स्वपुरुषैर्जन्तुषु सम्परेतेषु यथाकर्मावद्यं
दोषमेवानुल्लङ्घितभगवच्छासन: सगणो दमं धारयति | ६ ! तत्र हैके नरकानेकविंशतिं गणयन्ति अथ तांस्ते
लालाभक्ष: ॰पानमिति । किञ्च क्षारकर्दमो रक्षोगणभोजन:शूलप्रोतो दन्दशूकोऽवटनिरोधन:
पर्यावर्तन: सूचीमुखमित्यष्टाविंशतिर्नरका विविधयातनाभूमय: । ७1

The sage replied : They lie within this universe below the earth and above the water
(filling the rest of the space up to the shell of the mundane egg) on the southern side. In that
quarter reside the groups of the manes called the Agniswattas and so on, contemplating on
the Lord through supreme concentration of mind and invoking only real blessings on their
scions (on the earth). (5) There also, itis said, resides the glorious Yama (son of Vivaswan,
the sun-god), the ruler of the manes, along with his attendants, and inflicts punishment in the
same form as the crime itself on the departed Jivas (embodied souls)—brought to his realm
by his servants—strictly in proportion to the sin attaching to their (evil) deeds, taking care not
to violate the commands (the penal code) of the almighty Lord (neither showing any favour
to the evil-doers by remitting the rigour of his rod nor inflicting a penalty heavier than what
they deserve, thus holding the scales even). (6) Some (learned men) actually declare the
number of hells (the departments of punishment) in that region as twenty-one. Now, we are
going to describe them to you, O king, in order along with reference to their name,
appearance (the forms of punishment inflicted in each) and character (the nature of sins that
are sought to be expiated through them). They are named as Tamisra, Andhatamisra,
Raurava, Maharaurava, Kumbhipaka, Kalasitra, Asipatravana, Skaramukha, Andhakupa,
Krmibhojana, Sarndarhga, Taptastirmi, Vajrakantakasalmali, Vaitarani, Puyoda, Pranarodha,
Vigasana, Lalabhaksa, Sarameyadana, Avici and Ayahpana. Including seven more, viz.,
Ksarakardama, Raksoganabhojana, Sulaprota, Dandaguka, Avatanirodhana, Paryavartana
and Sicimukha, there are (all told) twenty-eight hells, places where tortures of various kinds
are gone through (by the sinful). (7)

aa यस्तु परवित्तापत्यकलत्राण्यपहरति स fe कालपाशबद्धो यमपुरुषैरतिभयानकैस्तामिस्त्रे नरके
मूरच्छामुपयाति तामिस्तरप्राये। oi एवमेवान्धतामिस्रे यस्तु वञ्चयित्वा पुरुषं दारादीनुपयुङ्क्ते यत्र शरीरी
Prorat यातनास्थो वेदनया नष्टमतिर्नष्टदृष्टिश्च भवति यथा वनस्पतिर्वृश्च्यमानमूलस्तस्मादन्धतामिस्त्रं
तमुपदिशन्ति। ९।

Of these, he who takes away (by force or fraud) another's wealth, child or wife is indeed
bound with the cords of Death and forcibly thrown by the most dreadful servants of Yama
into the hell called Tamisra. Being tormented in that utterly dark region by being deprived of
food and water, belaboured with cudgels, and severely scolded and with other (such)
tortures, the Jiva is filled with dismay and falls into a swoon that very moment. (8) Even so
he, indeed, who enjoys the wife etc., of another by deceiving the man is cast into (the hell
called) Andhatamisra. (As itis) being thrown into that hell and (while) undergoing the tortures
(peculiar to it), the Jiva (embodied soul) is deprived, through agony, ofits consciousness and
vision, like a tree which is being cut at the root. Hence they call this (particular) hell (by the
name of) Andhatamisra (that which is full of blinding darkness). (9)

यस्त्विह वा एतदहमिति ममेदमिति भूतद्रोहेण केवलं स्वकुटुम्बमेवानुदिनं प्रपुष्णाति a तदिह विहाय
