418 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 71

१११ ११ TR rt tom ttre tt ee SESE SS EE SSS LESS LET LSA LES eH AANA LETHAL,

they were with the desire to conquer Jarasandha, did not receive with approbation the words
of the sage. Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), smilingly spoke to His devotee
Uddhava in sweet words (as below). (45)
श्रीभगवानुवाच
त्वै हि न: परमं चक्षु: सुहृन्मन्नार्थतत्त्ववित् । तथात्र ब्रूह्यनुष्ठेयं Mee: TAM तत्।४६॥
The glorious Lord said ; (Uddhava !) you are Our disinterested friend and know the
secret of what should be decided upon through deliberation. Indeed you are our supreme

eye (as it were). Now tell us what should be done under the circumstances. We (fully) rely
on you and shall act upon your advice. (46)

इत्युपामन्तितो sat सर्वज्ञेनापि मुग्धवत् | feet शिरसाऽऽधाय see: प्रत्यभाषत ।४७॥

Questioned thus by the Master, who, though omniscient, was behaving like an ignorant
man, Uddhava received His command with his head bent low and replied (as below). (47)

Thus ends the seventieth discourse bearing on the deliberations about the Lord's departure
in the flatter half of Book Ten of the great.and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIRS Se:
PISS Se

अथैकसप्ततितमोऽध्याय:
Discourse LXXIl
Sri Krsna goes to Indraprastha
श्रीरुक उवाच
इत्युदीस्तिमाकण्य देवर्षेरुद्धवोऽब्रवीत् । सभ्यानां मतमाज्ञाय कृष्णस्य च महामति: । १ ।
SriSuka began again ; (Pariksit !) hearing these words (of the Lord), Uddhava who was

possessed of great wisdom, considered the statement of the celestial sage Narada and the
opinion of the councillors as well as of Sri Krsna (Himself), and spoke thus. (1)

उद्धव उवाच

यदुक्तमूषिणा देव साचिव्यं यक्ष्यतस्त्वया । कार्यं पैतृष्रसेयस्य रक्षा च झरणैषिणाम् । २ ।
wea राजसूयेन fei विभो। अतो जरासुतजय उभयार्थो मतो मम । ३ ।
were च महानर्थो ह्येतेनैव भविष्यति । cag aa गोविन्द wal बद्धान् विमुञ्चत: । ४ ।
a a edad राजा नागायुतसमो बले । बलिनामपि चान्येषां भीमं ana विना । ५ |
Ra स तु जेतव्यो मा हाताक्षौहिणीयुत: | ब्रह्मण्योऽभ्यर्थितो विप्रैर्न प्रत्याख्याति कर्हिचित् । ६ |
ब्रह्मवेषधरो गत्वा तं भिक्षेत वृकोदर: । हनिष्यति न ae RA तव सन्निधौ । |
Aft cite विश्वसर्गनिरोधयो:। हिरण्यगर्भ: ada कालस्यारूपिणस्तव । ८ ।

गायन्ति ते frend गृहेषु tel wal स्वहात्रुवधमात्मविमोक्षणं च ।

Tag कुञ्जरपतेर्जनकात्मजाया: पित्रोश्च लब्धशरणा मुनयो a च । ९ ।
जरासन्धवध: कृष्ण भूर्यर्थायोपकल्पते। प्राय: पाकविपाकेन तव चाभिमत: mad: ।१०॥
Uddhava submitted ; Lord, as recommended by the Devarsi, You should (certainly)
