Dis. 8 | BOOK EIGHT 769

ङ ङयन्र प्रे छी ङी की क HARE LEEK EEE SERA EERE EOH ALAA EAHA HE RHE RHE कज् EAE ER EHS eR ee
ee eee

robes, whodelight the denizens of heaven with their charming gait and playful glances.(7) Then,
again, appeared Goddess Rama (Laksmi), who is Affluence personified and is devoted to
the Lord, and who illumined the quarters with Her splendour like (a streak of) lightning
flashing against the crystalline mountain-range called Sudama. (8) All including gods,
demons and men conceiveda longing for Her *, their mind overpowered (through astonishment)
by the glory of Her comeliness, nobility, (young) age and (fair) complexion. (9) The great
Indra(the lord of paradise) brought for Her a most wonderful throne, while the principal rivers
(Ganga and so on) in their personal form brought sacred water (for Her ablutions) in jars of
gold. (10) (Mother) Earth gave (Her) all (kinds of) herbs required for Her ablutions. The cows
yielded to Her their five sacred products (viz., milk, curds, ghee, excrement and urine); and
Spring yielded (Her) the ee of the two vernal months (in the shape of flowers and fruits
appropriate to that season). (11) Rsis (seers) laid down the procedure of Her ablutions
according to the scriptural ordinance. Gandharvas (celestial musicians) sang auspicious
songs and their wives (too) danced and sang. (12) (Spirits presiding over) clouds sounded
with great force clay tomtoms, tabors, drums, double drums and clarionets, that produced
a tumultuous fanfare—as well as conchs, flutes and lutes. (13) Then the elephants guarding
the (four) quarters bathed Goddess Sri, who held a lotus in one of Her hands and was an
embodiment of virtue, with (gold) jars full of water to the accompaniment of hymns chanted
by Brahmanas.(14) (The god presiding over) the ocean offered Her two pieces of yellow silk
(one for being wrapped round Her loins andlower body and the other round Her upper limbs).
Varuna (the god of water) gave Her a garland called Vaijayanti, accompanied by black bees
drunk with the honey of its flowers. (15) Viswakarma, a lord of created beings, offered Her
wonderful ornaments; Saraswati (the goddess presiding over speech and learning), a
necklace of pearls; Brahma (the birthless creator), a lotus; and Nagas (serpent-demons) a
pair of ear-rings.(16)

m7: कृतस्वस्त्ययनोत्पलस्रजं ace परिगृह्य पाणिना ।

चचाल at सुकपोलकुण्डलं सव्रीडहासं दधती सुशोभनम् ।१७॥

eed चातिकृशोदरी समं निरन्तरं चन्दनकुङ्कुपोक्षितम्।

ततस्ततो नूपुरवल्गुशिञ्जितैर्विसर्पती हेमलतेव सा sities

विलोकयन्ती frame: पदं ga चाव्यभिचारिसद्गुणम् ।

गन्धर्वयक्षासुरसिद्धचारणत्रैविष्टपेयादिषु . नान्वविन्दत ।१९॥

TW यस्य न मन्युनिर्जयो ज्ञानं af तच्च न सङ्घवर्जितम् ।

कश्चिन्महांस्तस्य न कामनिर्जय: a gat: किं परतोव्यपाश्रय: ।२०॥

धर्म: wf तत्र न भूतसौहृदं त्याग: क्वचित् तत्र न मुक्तिकारणम् ।

aa न पुंसोऽस्त्यजवेगनिष्कृतं न fe द्वितीयो गुणसङ्घवर्जित: ।२१॥

क्वचिच्चिरायुर्न fe शीलमङ्गलं क्वचित् तदप्यस्ति न वेद्यमायुष: ।

यत्रोभयं कुत्र च सोऽप्यमङ्गल: सुमङ्गल: कश्च न wre हि माम् ।२२॥

Holding in one of Her hands a wreath of lotuses with (a swarm of) black bees humming

about it, and wearing a most charming face with a bashful smile playing on it and (brilliant)
ear-rings hanging against Her lovely cheek, Goddess Sri, who (in the form of a golden streak)

* Here it should be noted, as a learned and saintly commentator points out, that all |hose present in that assembly coveted
Goddess Laksmi only because they knew that, She being the deity presiding over fortune, Her grace would make them masters
of fortune. Otherwise they were all great devotees, as is evident from the fact that they all offered presents to Her as a token
of reverence and homage (vide verses 10 to16).
