Dis. 18] . TAV.BOOK ONE: ` 77
SOHO AKAAEA SEK EHEHOK ERAN ELSA HANH ERLE AK OHARA H OAH DORE EH HONE OH OEE RAH KREME HH EO
mat of straw or bare ground to sit on, and denied water to wash his hands (and feet)
or even kind words, the king thought himself as treated with disrespect and grew indignant
accordingly. (28) His mind being oppressed with hunger and thirst, there arose in him,
all of a sudden, a feeling of enmity and anger against the sage, which, O Saunaka, he
had never entertained before (against a Brahmana). (29) While departing, he indignantly
threw with the end of his bow a dead serpent across the shoulder of the Brahmana sage
and returned to his capital. (39) (He offered this indignity to the sage because he wanted
to make sure) whether he had closed his eyes inasmuch as he had (really) withdrawn
all his senses from their objects or he simply feigned deep meditation because he thought
he had nothing to do with the wretched Ksatriyas. (31)

तस्य पुत्रोऽतितेजस्वी विहरन् बालकोऽर्भकै: । राज्ञाघं प्रापितं तातं श्रुत्वा तत्रेदमब्रवीत् । ३२।

ae aed: पालानां dat बलिभुजामिव । स्वामिन्यघं ae दासानां द्वारपानां झयुनामिव 1331

ब्राह्मणै: क्षत्रबन्धुर्हि द्वारपालो निरूपित: । स met तद्गृहे द्वा:स्थ: सभाण्डं भोक्तुमर्हति । ३४॥

कृष्णे Ta भगवति जास्तर्युत्पथगामिनाम् । तद्भिन्नसेतूनद्याहं anf waa A बलम् । ३५॥

sae रोषताम्राक्षो व्रयस्यानृषिबालक: | कौशिक्याप उपस्पृश्य वाग्वज्रं, विससर्ज ह । ३६॥

इति लङ्घितमर्यादे तक्षक: सप्तपेऽहनि।दङ्खाति स्म कुलाङ्गारं चोदितो मे ततद्गुहम् 1301

The sage’s son, who was possessed of abundant spiritual glow, though a mere boy,

happened to be playing at that time with other Brahmana boys. Having heard of the
indignity to which his father had been subjected by the king, he made the following
observations on the spot :— (32) "Oh the unrighteousness of the ruling class, who have
grown fat like crows ! Like dogs that guard one's door, these servants (of the Brahmanas)
dare to insult their very masters ! (33) The Brahmanas have appointed the Ksatriya as
their door-keeper. How, then can he who has been posted at the gate enter the house
(of his master) and eat out of the latter's pot ? (34) Now that Lord Sri Krsna, the chastiser
of those who have strayed from the path of virtue, has departed, | shall presently correct
those that have violated the rules of decorum. Just see how powerful | arm !" (35) Having
thus spoken (to his playmates), the young sage sipped water from the Kausiki and, his
eyes turning crimson with anger, he hurled a thunderbolt in the form of the following
curse :— (36) "Impelled by me, Taksaka (a chief of the serpents) shall, on the seventh
day hence, bite that bane of his race, who has so openly transgressed the bounds of
propriety by his hostile behaviour towards my father.” (37)

ततोऽभ्येत्याश्रमं बालो Tes सर्पकलेवरम्। fiat वीक्ष्य दु:खार्तो मुक्तकण्ठो रुरोद ह । ३८॥
स वा आङ्गिरसो ब्रह्मन् श्रुत्वा सुतविलापनम् । उन्मील्य UAHA FET स्वांसे मृतोरगम् । ३९।
विसृज्य पुत्रं urs aa कस्माद्धि रोदिषि । केन वा a अपकृतमित्युक्त: स न्यवेदयत् ।४०॥
Pera नरेनद्रं स ब्राह्मणो नात्मजमभ्यनन्दत्।
ag बतांहो महदज्ञ ते कृतमल्पीयसि द्रोह उरुर्दमो धृत: Ive
न बवै नॄभिर्नरदेवें पराख्यं सम्मातुमर्हस्यविपक्वबुद्धे ।
यत्तेजसा दुर्विषहेण गुप्तां बिन्दन्ति भद्राण्यकुतोभया: प्रजा: ।४२॥
अलक्ष्यमाणे नरदेवनाम्नि VATS UOT AAS लोक: |
तदा हि चौरप्रचुरो विनङ्क्ष्यत्यरक्ष्यमाणोऽविवसूथवत् क्षणात् 183
तदद्य न: Wed यन्नष्टनाथस्य वसोर्बिलुम्पकात्।
परस्परंघ्रन्तिछापन्तिबृञ्जतेपकूस्रियोऽर्थान्षुब्दस्यवो TAT: ।४४॥
