540 । SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25

PHAN EEHHEKEHN ESHA THEHOHN HE eo SCUE ERS KSSH HEE LES CHK EEK eee een heeeeetehrer#irKt reer erkeah

य एष एवमनुश्रुतो ध्यायमानो मुमुक्षूणामनादिकालकर्मवासनाग्रथितमविद्यामयं हृदयग्रन्थिं
`सत्त्वरजस्तमोमयमन्तर्हृदयं Ta आशु निर्भिनत्ति तस्यानुभावान् भगवान् स्वायम्भुवो ATE: सह तुम्बुरुणा
सभायां ब्रह्मण: संश्लोकयामास | ८ |

Heard of as aforesaid from the mouth of a preceptor and being contemplated upon
(accordingly), Sankarsana enters the heart of the seekers of Liberation and quickly breaks
asunder the knot of ignorance formed in their heart as a result of tendencies to action,
existing from time without beginning and constituted of (the three modes of Prakrti, viz.,)
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. The glorious Narada, son of Brahma (the self-born) duly extolled
(on one occasion) with Tumburu (the celebrated Gandharva) in the court of Brahma (his
father) the glories of the selfsame Lord (as follows):—(8)

उत्पत्तिस्थितिलयहेतवोऽस्य कल्पा: सत्त्वाद्या: प्रकृतिगुणा यदीक्षयाऽऽसन्।

यद्रूपं yard यदेकमात्मान् नानाधात्कथमु ह वेद Tel वर्त्म। ९ ।

afi न: पुरुकृपया बभार ad संशुद्धं सदसदिदं विभाति तत्र।

यल्लीलां भृगपतिराददॆऽनवद्यामादातुं स्वजनमनांस्युदारवीर्य: । १० ।

am श्रुतमनुकीर्तयेदकस्मादार्तो वा यदि पतित: प्रलम्भनाद्वा।

ewe: सपदि नृणामशेषमन्यं कं शेषाद्भगवत आश्रयेन्मुमुक्षु:। ११।

मूर्धन्यर्पितमणुवत्सहस्त्रमूर्धो भूगोलं सगिरिसरित्समुद्रसत्त्वम्।

आनन्त्वादनिमितविक्रमस्य ye: को वीर्याण्यधिगणयेत्सहस्रजिह्व:।१२॥

एवम्प्रभावो भगवाननन्तो दुरन्तवीर्योरुगुणानुभाव:।

मूले रसाया: स्थितं आत्मतन्त्रो यो लीलया क्ष्मां स्थितये विभर्ति। १३

"How can one possibly know in reality the ways (the truth) of that Brahma by whose

thought (resolve to create the universe) the modes of Prakrti, Sattva and so on—which are
(severally) responsible for the creation, continuation (preservation) and dissolution of this
universe—are able (to function), (nay,) whose character is eternal and uncaused
(beginningless) inasmuch as, though one (before creation), it (produced and) bore in itself
(this) multiform universe ? (9) The same Brahma (transcendent Reality), in which appears
as distinct this manifest (gross) and unmanifest (subtle) creation, assumed out of abounding
compassion for us a form—consisting of Sattva (which is) entirely pure (unmixed with Rajas
and Tamas)—by which He chose to enact faultless (innocent) sports in order to captivate
the minds of His devotees, possessed as He is of unlimited energy like a lion (the king of
beasts). (10) (Even) if a fallen man in distress utters His name (as) heard (from the mouth
of a preceptor or anyone else) or even by chance, or (even) ina spirit of ridicule, he (not only
purifies himself then and there but) wipes out at once all the sin of (even other) men (who
merely think of him, much more of those who see him)! Whom other than Lord Sesa (who
grants the privilege of His service to those who seek refuge in Him) should one seeking
Liberation have recourse to? (11) Who can (hope to) exhaust by counting, even if endowed
with a thousand tongues, the (list of) exploits of that infinite Lord, whose prowess Cannot at
all be measured because of its unlimited nature, and on whose (one) head has been placed
(by Him of His own free will) the terrestrial globe—with (allits) mountains, rivers, oceans and
(numberless) living beings like a (mere) atom, while He is possessed of a thousand (such)
heads? (12) Suchis the glory of Lord Ananta, possessed of infinite strength and numberless
virtues and potencies, who supports the earth (on one of His heads) as a (mere) sport
(without any effort) for the maintenance of the entire creation, residing below the earth,
Himself supported by ( none but) His own Self." (13)
