Dis. 16 ] BOOK FIVE 497

SHER ERE EA .७.. EEE REE .. EERE EEE EEA TEESE HEE AHHH OEE A TEE HHH eee Ee

divisions, the oceans and so on). (2) For, (when) focussed.on the Lord's gross material form
(in the shape of this universe) the mind becomes (gradually) fit to be concentrated on the
immaterial, most subtle (hard to perceive), self-effulgent and transcendent Brahma (the
Infinite), known by the name of Lord Vasudeva. Therefore, be pleased to describe the same,

O (my) preceptor ! (3)

Ta महाराज भगवतो मायागुणविभूते: काष्ठां मनसा वचसा वाधिगन्तुमलं विब्रुधायुषापि
पुरुषस्तस्मात्प्राधान्येनैव भूगोलकविशेषं नामरूपमानलक्षणतो व्याख्यास्याम:। ४। यो वायं द्वीप:
कुवलयकमलकोशाभ्यन्तरकोशो नियुतयोजनविशाल: समवर्तुलो यथा पुष्करपत्रम्। ५। यस्मिन्नव
वर्षाणिनवयोजनसहस्रायम्रान्यष्ठंभिर्मंयदि।गिरिभि सुविभक्तानिभवन्ति।६।एषामथ्येइलाबृत
ङ्कृलयकण्लस्यमूर्धंनिद्बात्रिशत्सहस्रयाजनविततोमूलेषाडशसहस्रतावत्तान्तर्भूप्याप्रबिष्ट।भ्रा
उत्तरोत्तरेणेलावृतं नील: yaa: शृङ्गवानिति त्रयो रम्यकहिरण्मयकुरूणां auton मर्यादागिरय: प्रागायता
ट्टुटुंयन्तितक्षप्नोदावधयोद्विसहस्त्रपृथवएकेक्यापूर्वस्मग्व्यृडस्पाद्दुत्तरउत्तरोदशांशाधिकाशेनब्देर्घ्यएव

। ८

The sage (Sri Suka) replied : No man, 0 great king, can ever succeed in ascertaining
with his mind, much less (describing) in words, the full extent of the vast display (in the form
of the universe) set up by the Gunas of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) even if he strives
for a whole lifetime of the gods. Therefore, we propose to discuss at length only the salient
features of the terrestrial globe with the names, position, extent and characteristics of the
various subdivisions. (4) As for this (particular) Dwipa (the one inhabited by us), it represents
the innermost of the (seven) sheaths of the lotus-like terrestrial globe, with a diameter of one
lakh Yojanas (8,00,000 miles) and round (in shape) like the corolla of a lotus. (5) Inthis Dwipa
are comprised nine Varsas (subdivisions of a Dwipa)— each nine thousand Y ojanas (72,000
miles) in extent—clearly divided by eight mountain ranges which form their (natural)
boundaries. (6) In the middle of these continents stands the inner Varsa, called llavrta, at the
centre of which is situated the king of (all principal) mountain ranges, Meru (Sumeru), entirely
consisting of gold and possessing a height equal to the extent of the Dwipa (viz., one lakh
Yojanas). It forms the pericarp of the lotus-like terrestrial globe and has a diameter of thirty-
two thousand Yojanas (2,56,000 miles) at the top and (only) sixteen thousand Yojanas
(1,28,000 miles) at the foot, with its root lying under the earth's surface to a depth of sixteen
thousand Yojanas. (That is to say, the mountain is only eighty-four thousand Yojanas high
above the earth's surface). (7) To the north of Ilavrta are situated one after another the three
mountain ranges called Nila, Sweta and Srngavan, severally forming the boundaries of the
Varsas bearing the names of Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru and extending east and west
as faras the salt ocean, each two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles) wide and every exterior
range being shorter in length alone by a little over one-tenth of the next interior range (but
equal in height and breadth). (8)

wa दक्षिणेनेलावृतं निषधो हेमकूटो हिमालय sft प्रागायता यथा नीलादयोऽयुतयोजनोत्सेधा
हरिवर्षकिम्पुरुषभारतानां यथासंख्यम्। ९ । तथैवेलावृतमपरेण पूर्वेण च माल्यवद्गन्धमादनावानीलनिषधायतौ
द्विस’हृस्रंपप्रधतु.॰ केतुमालभद्राश्बयो:सींमार्नविदध्राते। १०।मन्दरोमेरुमन्द्रर: मुपा'श्र्व:कुफू
इत्ययुतयोजनविस्तारोन्नाहा मेरोश्चतुर्दिशमवष्टम्भगिरय उपक्लृप्ता:।११। चतुरष्वेतेषु
शतयोजनपरिणाहा:। १२ । ह्रदाश्चत्वार: पयोमध्विक्षुरसमृष्टजला यदुपस्पर्शिन उपदेवगणा योगैश्वर्याणि
स्वाभाविकानि भरतर्षभ धारयन्ति। १३ देवोद्यानानि च भवन्ति चत्वारिं नन्दनं चैत्ररथं वैभ्राजकं
