104 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5

sprang up the cosmic Mind (as well as the deity presiding over the same, viz., the moon-god)
and the ten deities severally presiding over the five senses of perception and the five organs
ofaction, viz., the Digdevatas, the wind-god, the sun-god, Varuna, the twin-gods Aswins (the
physicians of the gods), the god of fire, Indra (the lord of paradise), Lord Visnu (appearing
as a younger brother of Indra and therefore called Upendra), Mitra (one of the twelve sons
of Aditi) and Prajapati*(30) From the Rajasika Ego, as it underwent transformation, were
evolved the ten Indriyas—the five senses of perception, viz., the auditory sense, the sense
of touch, the sense of sight, the sense of taste and the olfactory sense, and the five organs
of action, viz., the organ of speech, the hands and feet, the organ of generation andthe organ
of excretion. Again, the intellect, which is the faculty of cognition, and Prana the faculty of
action, are also the evolutes of the Rajasika Ego. (31)

यदैतेऽसङ्घता भावा भूतेन्दियमनोगुणा: | यदायतननिर्माणे णि न ङोकुर्ब्रह्मवित्तम । ३२॥
a संहत्य UR भगवच्छक्तिचोदिता: । सदसत्त्वमुपादाय चोभयं ससृजुर्ह्यद: 133!
वर्षपूगसहस्रान्ते तदण्डमुदकेशयम् | कालकर्मस्वभावस्थो जीवोऽजोवमजीवयत् । ३४॥
a wa पुरुषस्तस्मादण्डं निर्भिद्य निर्गत: | सहस्रोर्वङ्ध्रिबाह्वक्ष: सहस्राननशीर्षवान् । ३५॥
यस्यैहाबयबलक्मिम्॰ न कल्पयन्ति मनीषिण: | कट्यादिभिरध: FA ana जघनादिभि: 1361
पुरुषस्य मुखं ब्रह्म क्षत्रमेतस्य alga: | ऊर्वोव्वैश्यो भगवत: पद्भ्यां शूद्रोऽभ्यजायत । ३७।
भूर्लोक: कल्पित: पदभ्यां भुवर्लोकोऽस्य नाभित: | gar स्वर्लोक उरसा भहर्लोको महात्मन: । ३८।
भ्रीवायाँ जनलोकश्च तपोलोक: स्तनद्वयात्। मूर्धभि: सत्यलोकस्तु ब्रह्मलोक: सनातन: ।३९।॥
तत्कट्यां चातलं क्लुप्तमूरुभ्यां वितलं विभो: | जानुभ्यां सुतलं Ws जङ्घाभ्यां तु तलातलम् sot
भहातलें तु गुल्फाभ्यां प्रपदाभ्याँ रसातलम्।पातालं पादतलत इति लोकमय: पुमान् ।४१॥
भूर्लोक: कल्पित: पद्भ्यां भुवर्लोकोऽस्य नाभित: | स्वर्लोक: कल्पितो Wal इति वा लोककल्पना 1S? I
ofa श्रीमद्भागवते महापुराणे प रमहंस्यां संहितायां द्वितीयस्कन्धे पञ्चमाऽध्याय: ।`।

O Narada (the foremost among the knowers of Brahma), so long as these categories—
the gross elements, the Indriyas, the mind and the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti—
remained dissociated they could not erect a house in the form of a body. (32) Then, urged
by God's power, they combined with one another and, assuming between themselves the
role of cause and its effects, produced both the cosmic and the individual body. (33) The
macrocosm in the form ofan egg |lay on the causal waters ina lifeless condition for a thousand
years. With the help of Time as well as of the destiny and innate disposition of the individual
souls, however, at the end of this period the Lord (who is the life-giver of all) infused life into
this egg. (34) Bursting open that (Cosmic) egg, issued therefrom the same Supreme Person
(the Cosmic Being) with thousands of thighs, feet, arms and eyes and thousands of faces
and heads too. (35) It is in His limbs that the wise locate the various worlds comprised in this
universe—the seven lower spheres below His waist and the seven higher spheres above His
hip and loins. (36) The Brahmana (the priestly class) represents the mouth of this Cosmic
Being and the Ksatriya (the warrior-ciass), His arms. The Vaigya (the trading class)

emanated from the Lord's thighs and the Stdra (the labouring and artisan classes) from His
feet. (37) The seven subterranean spheres and the sphere of the earth are located in His
।॥ १

* Of the ten gods enumerated above, ihe Digcevatas preside over the auditory sense, the wind-god over the sense of
touch. the sun-god over the sense ot sight. Varuna over the sense of taste and Aswins over the olfactory sense. Again, the god
of fire presides over the organ of speech Indra over ine nancs. Upenara over the feet. Mitra over the organ of excretion and
Prajapat: (the god presiding over créat.on) over the organ ot generation.

RMON EMO ROR WOM EME ETH {entetern Ie ere nine een ten et von er SRM NE RR HORE RE RH

ye
