Dis. 7] BOOK FIVE 463

SHESECSE LANCERS HEAR ECERAEREREHKHEEEHNEK CHE Hee KeVKehARhesKerererererererrenkh een

Thus ends the sixth discourse forming part of the Narrative of Lord Rsabhadeva,
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

RENE ECE
PIED ESI CS

अथ सप्तमोऽध्याय:

Discourse VII

The story of Bharata
श्रीशुक उवाच

भरतस्तु महाभागवतो यदा भगवतावनितलपरिपालनाय सञ्चिन्तितस्तदनुशासनपर: पञ्चजनीं
विश्वरूपदुहितरमुपयेमे। १ तस्यामु ह वा आत्मजान् कात्स्न्यनानुरूपानात्मन: पञ्च जनयामास भूतादिरिव
भूतसूक्ष्माणि । २। सुमतिं राष्ट्रभृतं सुदर्शनमावरणं धूम्रकेतुमिति। अजनाभं नामैतद्वर्षं भारतमिति aa आरभ्य
व्यपदिशन्ति। ३।

Sri Suka began again : When Bharata, who was a great devotee of the Lord, was
mentally appointed by Lord Rsabhadeva (before He retired to the woods) to the rulership of
the earth (the kingdom of his father), he married Paficajani, a daughter of Viswarupa, intent
as he was on obeying the command of the Lord. (1) Even as Ahankara (the source of the
subtle elements) begets the five subtle elements, he (too) begot through her five sons—
Sumati, Rastrabhrt, Sudarsana, Avarana and Dhimraketu by name—who were entirely
after him. It is from his time that they call this Varsa (subdivision of Jambtdwipa)—
(heretofore) known by the name of Ajanabha—as Bharata. (2-3)

स बहुविन्महीपति: पितृपितामहवदुरुवत्सलतया ta स्वे कर्मणि वर्तमाना: प्रजा: । :
पर्यपालयत्।४। SH च wed यज्ञक्रतुरूपं क्रतुभिरुच्चावचै: श्रद्धयाऽऽहृताग्निहोत्रदर्शपूर्ण-
मासचातुर्मांस्यपशुसोमानां प्रकृतिविकृतिभिरनुसवनं चातुर्होत्रविधिना।५। सम्प्रचरत्सु नानायागेषु
eee + ति ॥ =< क रि ३ referer
मन्त्राणामर्थनियामकतया क्षात्कर्तरि परदेवतायां weft वासुदेव wa भावयमान
आत्मनैषुण्यमृदितकषायो हवि:ष्वध्वर्युभिर्गृह्यमाणेषु a यजमानो यज्ञभाजो देवांस्तान्
पुरुषावयवेष्वभ्यध्यायत्। ६। एवं कर्मविशुद्ध्या विशुद्धसत्त्वस्यान्तर्हृदयाकाशशरीरे ब्रह्मणि भगवति
निजपुरुषहल्लिखितेनात्मनि पुरुषरूपेण विरोचमान उच्चैस्तरां भक्तिरनुदिनमेधमानरयाजायत। 9 |

Remaining devoted to his duty like his father (Lord Rsabha) and grandfather (king
Nabhi), the said monarch, who possessed an extensive knowledge and was extremely
fond of his subjects, duly protected the people, who (strictly) adhered each to his
prescribed duty. (4) He also worshipped, with (due) reverence at the appointed hours,
the Lord appearing (both) in the form of Yajfias (sacrificial performances conducted
without the Yupa or sacrificial post) and Kratus (those distinguished by the presence of
such a post) through sacred rites (both) big and small—in the form of Agnihotra, Darga,
Purnamasa, Caturmasya and Pasusoma of both kinds—those complete in every detail
and those lacking in some particular—undertaken under proper authority and performed
with the co-operation of four officiating priests (viz.,a Hota, an Adhwaryu, an Udgata and
a Brahma* ). (5) When the various sacrificial performances were duly carried on with special

* The duties of all these have been mentioned In the footnote on I. iv. 19.
