।

124 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 6

RERARTAARAHKEAAARERKE ० 49 # 9 ERORTE १99 ARREARRAASTAERAAREATEREEEHEOLTARAT ON AHORA 798

तस्या: स्वनेनातिगभीररंहसा साद्रिर्मही द्यौश्च चचाल सग्रहा ।
रसा दिशश्च प्रतिनेदिरि जना: पेतु: fat ववज्रनिपातशङ्कया । १२
निशाचरीत्थॆ व्यथितस्तना व्यसुर्व्यदाय केशांश्चरणौ भुजावपि |
ward गोष्ठे निजरूपमास्थिता वज्राहतो वृत्र इवापतन्नृप 1931

Sri Suka resumed: Pondering on his way that the words of Vasudeva (the son of Sura)
could not be untrue, Nanda sought Sri Hari as his refuge, apprehensive as he was of the
coming of startling events. (1) Despatched by Karnsa, the terrible demoness Putana, who
was given to (the practice of) killing infants, moved about in towns, villages, cowherdstations
etc., killing infants (wherever she went). (2) Ogresses and others find their way only there
where people, though devoted to their duties, do not practise the hearing etc., of the names
and stories of Lord Visnu (the Protector of devotees), capable of exterminating the ogres. (3)
Reaching Gokula, ruled over by Nanda, on one occasion, and disguising herself as a woman
through her witchcraft, the said PUtana, who was capable of coursing through the air and
could go anywhere she pleased, entered the village. (4) Seeing that lovely woman, clad in
fine clothes, with jasmine flowers tucked to her braid, her slender waist pressed as it were
between her bulky hips (below) and her full breasts (above), and with her face set off with
curly locks radiant with the lustre of her swinging ear-rings, the Gopis thought her to be the
most beautiful Laksmi (Herself), come to see Her Spouse, distinguished as she was by her
hand bearing a lotus (the emblem of Laksmi) and captivating the mind of the inhabitants of
Vraja by her side-long looks accompanied with sweet smiles. (5-6) Hunting for infants and
propelled by Providence, Putana (lit., an evil spirit seizing infants and causing their death)
saw lying ina bed in that palace of Nanda, the Babe (Sri Krsna), the Destroyer of the wicked,
with His immeasurable glory veiled, like fire buried under ashes. (7) Recognizing her to be
an evil spirit given to the destruction of infants, Sri Krsna (the Soul of the mobile and immobile
creation) lay with His eyes utterly closed. She placed the infinite Lord, her very death, inher
lap (even) as an ignorant man would a sleeping serpent, mistaking it for a rope. (8) Seeing
inside the house that excellent woman—whose (outward) behaviour was most affectionate
(like that of a mother), though she was possessed of a cruel heart and thus resembled a
sword encased in a charming scabbard—and overwhelmed with her splendour, the two
mothers (Rohini and Yagoda) stood merely gazing. (9) Taking Sri Krsna in her lap there, that
cruel woman put into the Baby's mouth her dreadful breast besmeared with deadly poison.
Squeezing it hard with both his hands, the Lord full of indignation forthwith sucked the
poison alongwith her (very) life. (10) Being wrung inall her vital parts, she cried out saying.
"Leave me, O leave me, enough of it!” Distending her eyes and tossing about her feet and
arms again and again, she actually screamed, her limbs drenched with prespiration. (11) As
a result of her very deep and violent roar the earth with its mountains and heaven with its
planets shook, the subterranean worlds as well as the (four) quarters echoed and people
toppled down on the ground under the apprehension ofa thunderbolt. (12) Thus tormented
at her breasts and reverting (in her helpless state) to her own (demoniac) form, she (sprang
and) fell dead in (the outskirts of) Vraja, opening her mouth and flinging about her hair and
stretching her legs and arms too (even) like the demon Vrtra knocked down by the
thunderbolt (of Indra), O protector of men !(13)

पतमानोऽपि तद्देहस्तिगव्यूत्यन्तरद्रुमान् । चूर्णयामास राजेन्द्र महदासीत्तदद्भुतम् । १४॥
ईषामात्रोग्रदंष्टास्यं गिरिकन्दरनासिकम् । गण्डशैलस्तनं रौद्रं प्रकीर्णारुणमूर्धजम् । १५॥
अन्धकूपगभीराक्षं पुलिनारोहभीषणम् । बद्धसेतुभुजोर्वङ्ध्रि हून्यतोयहृदोदरम् । १६॥

