Dis, 21 ] BOOK ELEVEN 615

ORR ROR EROTICA EIN कक ज OREO कक E90 FOI HO RETR OTRO SO A NH

(the Vaikhari state). (As consisting of the Cosmic Prana) it is endless (in point of time) and
limitless (in space), profound (obscure) and difficult to fathom like the ocean, (36) Presided
over by Me—the infinite Brahma, possessed of endless potencies—the said Veda is
perceived (by the wise) in the form of the Anahata sound in (all) created beings as the fibre
in a lotus stalk. (37) (Even) as a spider sends forth the cobweb from its heart through its
mouth, (the Lord in the form of Hiranyagarbha working through) the vital air, essentially
blissful, and appearing in the form of Veda, with the material of Anahata sound evolves from
the cavity of the heart through the mind, which conceives the (various) sounds represented
by the letters of the alphabet, the Vaikhari form of speech—flowing in a thousand channels
and embellished with (the articulate sounds represented by the letters of the alphabet*
classified (in Indian phonetics) as sibilants, vowels, aspirants and semi-vowels (so-called
because they stand between the vowels, on the one hand, and consonants on the other),
manifested out of the (sacred sound) OM (heard in a subtle form within the heart)—
elaborated by various languages (Vedic as well as secular) and characterized by (a number
of) metres successively consisting of four more letters than the preceding and having no limit
or end; and Himself withdraws it. (38—40) Some of these metres are (respectively known
by the names of) Gayatrit, Usnik, Anustubh, Brhati, Pankti, Tristubh, Jagat, Aticchanda,
Atyasti, Atijagati and Ativirat. (41) None in the world other than Me knows the heart (hidden
meaning) of this (sacred) speech (in the form of Veda)—as to whatitlays down (inthe section
dealing with ritual acts), what it reveals (through the various Mantras or sacred texts in the
section dealing with the worship of gods) and what it puts forward by way of hypothesis and
(then) calls it in question (in the section dealing with spiritual knowledge). (42) Me (alone in
the form of Yajfia) it enjoins (in the Karmakanda), Me (alone in the form of various deities)
it names (in the Devatakanda), (nay,) whatever (objective existence such as ether) is
superimposed on Me (first) and (then) negatived (in the Jiianakanda) is also Myself. Taking
its stand on Me (as the Cause of all causes and the highest Reality) the Veda posits diversity
asa mere illusion and (then), denying it, ultimately becomes quiet. This much is the import
of all the Vedas. (43)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Eleven of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

सिर्वे
त्ल् ततजटर

८

en

* The twenty-five consonants.viz., क, ख, ग, च, ङ च, 8, ज . ज ट. ठ. ङ. व, ग त, थ द, ध न प फ च, vanduare collectively known
as the sibilants. अ.३. उ. % %, 7, ऎ stand share knownas vowels; 7, प स, and ह are called the aspirants, while 3%, @and aare
known as the Antahsthas.

+ Of these the Gayatri consists of 24 letters, Usnik, of 28, Anustubh, of 32 and so on
