Dis. 1] BOOK FOUR 293

Stet ttre ert hee SS ttre teri tri simore tir tat itr ees hehe tehee RR er eee ee HHH ee

the quarters, the winds, rivers and mountains (all) became placid and tranquil. (52-53)
Musical instruments playedin heaven, showers of flowers rained, Sages Offeredtheir praises
(highly) gratified, the Gandharvas and Kinnaras Sang and celestial women danced. (In this
way) there was supreme felicity and Brahma (the creator) and all the other divinities waited
on the Lord with songs of praised. (54-55)
- यो मायया विरचितं निजयाऽऽत्मनीदं खे रूपभेदमिव तत्प्रतिचक्षणाय |

एतेन धर्मसदने ऋषिमूर्तिनाद्य प्रादुश्चकार Geert नम: परस्मै । ५६॥

सोऽयं स्थितिव्यतिकरोपशामाय gem waa न: सुरगणाननुमेयतत्त्व: ।

दृश्याददभ्रकरुणेन विलोकनेन यच्छीनिकेतममलं क्षिपतारविन्दम् । ५७।

The gods said : Obeisance to that Supreme Person who manifested in His Self this
Universe created by His own Maya (delusive potency), even like the phenomenal
appearances in the sky, and who has appeared today in the house of Dharma (the god of
piety) in the yonder form of a sage in Order to reveal that Self. (56) May He whose true
nature can only be inferred be pleased to look on us, the gods—who have been created
by Him by means of Sattva (the principle of goodness and harmony) in order to put an end
to any disturbance in the orderly existence of the world—with an eye full of compassion,
an eye which outvies the shining lotus, which is the abode of beauty (or the home of
Laksmi, the goddess of beauty). (57)

ताविमौ वै भगवतो हरेरंश्चाविहागतौ गो। भारव्ययाय च भुव: कृष्णौ यदुकुरूद्वहौ । ५९

Thus extolled and honoured by the gods, who were blessed by Their sight, dear Vidura,
the two divine sages (Nara and Narayana) left for the Gandhamadana mountain. (58) It is
those two part manifestations of Lord Sri Hari that appeared in this world, with a view to
relieving the earth of its burden, in the person of Sri Krsna, the Ornament of the Yadus, and
Arjuna (also known by the name of Krsna because of his swarthy complexion), the foremost
of the Kurus. (59)

स्वाहाभिमानिनश्चाग्नेरात्मजांस्रीनजीजनत् । पावकं पवमानं च aft च हुतभोजनम् 1६०॥
sw: wwe deaf पञ्च aia एवैकोनपञ्चाशत्साकं पितृपितामहै: 1691
वैतानिके कर्मणि यन्नामभिर्व्रह्मवादिभि: | आग्नेय्य इष्टयो ua निरूप्यन्तेऽग्नयस्तु 31621

Swaha (the spouse of the fire-god) bore three sons—Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci—all
of whom are deities presiding over fire and partake of the sacrificial offerings. (60) From
these, again, sprang up forty and five other fire-gods. It is these (forty-five) together with their
fathers and grandfather (mentioned in the preceding verse), that make the forty-nine fire-
gods. (61) These are the (forty-nine sacred) fires in whose names Istis (sacrifices on a small
scale) intended for the propitiation of the fire-god are undertaken during Vedic sacrificial
performances by men well-versed in the Vedas. (62)

अग्निघ्वात्ता बहिंषद: सौम्या: पितर आज्यपा: | साम्नयोऽनग्नयस्तेषां पत्नी दाक्षायणी स्वधा ।६३॥

The Agniswattas, the Barhisads, the Saumyas and the Ajyapas—these are (the four
main divisions of) the Pitrs (the eternal manes). They are either Sagnika (receiving libations
of water through the sacred fire) or Niragnika (receiving libations of water without such
medium). Swadha, daughter of Daksa, is their common spouse. (63)
