Dis. 13] BOOK EIGHT 791

Ae AR tee eRe HIS AAT ERE OHAT ETCH ENR KET ET ESHA RAKE RENAE eee eee
कश्यपोऽत्रिर्वसिष्ठश्च विश्चामित्रोऽथ गौतम: । जमदग्निर्भरद्वाज इति anda: स्मृता: । ५ ।
अत्रापि भगवज्ज्म कश्यपाददितेरभूत्। आदित्यांनामवरजो विष्णुर्वामनरूपधृक् । ६ |
संक्षेपतो मयोक्तानि सप्त मन्वन्तराणि ते । भविष्याण्यथ वक्ष्यामि विष्णो: शक्त्यान्वितानि च । |

Sri Suka began again: The seventh, the present Manu is ason of Vivaswan (the sun-
god), who is known by the name of Sraddhadeva. (Now) hear from me (the names) of his
sons.(1) They are Ikswaku and Nabhaga, Dhrsta and Saryati, Narisyanta and Nabhaga; and
the seventh {s called Dista. (2) Add to them Kartisa and Prsadhra and the tenth is
remembered by the name of Vasuman. These are the ten sons of the Vaivaswata Manu, 0
tormentor of foes! (3) The (twelve) Adityas (the sons of Aditi, the gods successively presiding
over the sun month after month), the (eight) Vasus, the (eleven) Rudras, the (ten)
ViSwedevas, the (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods), the two Aswins (the twin physicians of the
gods) and the (three) Rbhus are the (seven orders of) gods (in office), O Pariksit, Purandara
being (the name of) their Indra (ruler). (4) KaSyapa, Atriand Vasistha, Viswamitra, Gautama,
Jamadagni and Bharadwaja are recognized as the seven (principal) seers. (5) In this (the
present) Manvantara too the descent of the Lord took place from the sage Kasyapa (a lord
of the created beings)and (his spouse) Aditi. The youngest of the Adityas, who assumed the
form of a dwarf, is Lord Visnu ( Himself). (6) Thus (the first) seven Manvantaras have been
briefly described by me to you. | shall presently tell you of the coming (seven) as well, whith
are (likewise) connected with the descents of the Lord.(7)

विव्रस्वतश्च द्वे जाये विश्वकर्मसुते उभे। संज्ञा छाया च wits ये प्रागभिहिते तव । ८ ।
तृतीयां वड्वामेके तासां संज्ञासुतास्त्रय: | यमो यमी श्राद्धदेवर्छायायाश्च सुताञ्छृणु । ९ |
सावर्णिस्तपती aan भार्या संवरणस्य या । हनैश्चरस्तृतीयोऽभूदश्चिनौ वडवात्मजौ । १०॥
अष्टमेऽन्तर stat सावर्णिर्भविता मनु:। निर्मोकविरजस्काद्या: सावर्णितनया नृप । ११
तत्र ta: सुतपसो विरजा अमृतप्रभा:। तेषां विरोचनसुतो बलिरिन्द्रो भविष्यति । १२।
want याचमानाय विष्णवे a: पदन्रयम्। राद्धमिन्द्रपदं feat aa: सिद्धिमवाप्स्यति । १३॥
योऽसौ भगवता ag: प्रीतेन सुतले पुन:। निवेशितोऽधिके स्वर्गादधुनाऽऽस्ते स्वराडिवि । १४॥
Trea दीप्तिमान् रामो द्रोणपुत्र: कृपस्तथा। ऋष्यशृङ्ग-: पितास्माकं भगवान्बादरायण: ।१५॥
इमे सप्तर्षयस्तत्र भविष्यन्ति स्वयोगत:। इदानीमासते राजन् A स्व आश्रममण्डले । १६॥
देवगुह्यात्सरस्वत्यां सार्वभौम इति प्रभु:। स्थानं पुरन्दराद्धूत्वा बलये दास्यतीश्चर: । १७॥

Now, there were two wives of Vivaswan, both daughters of Viswakarma (the architect
of heaven), Sarnjfia and Chaya (by name), O king of kings, that have already* been spoken
of (by me) to you. (8) Some refer to Vadava as the third.t Of these (three), Yama (the god
of retribution), Yami (sister of Yama, the deity presiding over the river Yamuna and married}
by Lord SriKrsna) and Sraddhadeva are the three progeny of Samjfia. Also hear (the names)
of the sons of Chaya. (9) They are Savarni (a future Manu) and adaughter, Tapati (by name),
who became the wife of Sarnvarana and Sanaiscara (the deity presiding over the planet of
the same name, now known as Saturn) came to be the third; while the two ASwins are the
sons of Vadava. (10) When the eighth Manvantara will have commenced Savarni will

* Vide VI. Vi. 40-41.

+ According to Suka, however, it was Sarnjiia herself who took the form of a Vadava (mare) and gave birth to the two
Aswins—vide VI. vi.40. *

३ Vide. X. 58. 17—23, 29.
