72 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19

SSS nh artnet Se he eee eR RASS EN ASTER ESE LAOREET ESSE HA AHATKESA ESHER eH २२२२ न

Saying so, Piru most gladly accepted his father's old age. The latter too, 0 protector of
men, enjoyed the pleasures of sense with (the help of) his (Paru's) youth, as enjoined by the
scriptures. (45) Duly protecting his subjects like a father, Yayati (the ruler of all the seven
divisions of the globe) enjoyed the sense-objects according to his pleasure, his senses
remaining unimpaired. (46) Devayani too, the beloved of her husband, afforded supreme
delight in private to her beloved husband from day to day with mind, speech, body and
(various) articles (of enjoyment). (47) Yayati (also) propitiated through sacrifices with liberal
gifts of money Lord Sri Visnu (the Destroyer of sins), the Deity presiding over sacrifices, the
embodiment of all the Vedas, who represents all the gods in His Person. (48) Like a mass
of clouds in the sky, this world—which is (no better than) a dream, a hoax and a fancy—is
superimposed on God; it now appears as different (in the shape of numberless names and
forms) and now disappears (during deep sleep as well as at the time of final dissolution). (49)
Installing in his heart the selfsame Lord Vasudeva, the Indweller of all hearts, who has His
abode in water and is subtler than the subtle, Yayati, who had no desire (left) in him,
worshipped Him there. (50) Though enjoying the pleasures of sense—which are only
conceptual—with his (five) wicked senses as well as with the mind, which is the sixth, for
thousands of years, Yayati (the ruler of the entire globe) did not feel sated. (51)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Cues

र्म
.९
a उऽध्याय:
+

Discourse XIX
Yayati's Renunciation
See उवाच
स इत्थमाचरन् कामान् स्रैणोऽपह्नवमात्मन: | बुद्ध्वा प्रियायै निर्विण्णो गाथामेतामगायत । १ ।
ayy भार्गव्यमूं mat मद्बिधाचरितां भुवि । धीरा यस्यानुशोचन्ति वने ग्रामनिवासिन: । २ ।
aed एको वने wise विचिन्वन् प्रियमात्मन: । ददर्श कूपे पतितां स्वकर्मवशगामजाम्। ३ ।
Te उद्धूरणोपायं aa: कामी विचिन्तयन्। व्यधत्त तीर्थमुद्धृत्य विषाणाग्रेण रोधसी 1 ४ ।
arid कूपात् सुश्रोणी तमेव wand किल । तया qd wages बह्वयोऽजा: कान्तकामिनी: । ५ ।
पीवानं इमश्रुलं प्रेष्ठं मीढ्वांसं याभकोविदम्। स एकोऽजवृषस्तासां बह्वीनां रतिवर्धन: ।
रेमे कामग्रहग्रस्त आत्मानं नावब्रुध्यत । ६ ।
तमेव प्रेष्ठतमया रममाणमजान्यया। विलोक्य कूपसंविद्मा नामृष्यद्बस्तकर्म a ७ ।
a yet कामिनं क्षणसोहदम्।इन्दियाराममुत्सृज्य स्वामिनं दु:खिता ययौ । ८ |
सोऽपि चानुगत: em: कृषणस्तां प्रसादितुम्। कुर्वन्निडविडाकारं नाशक्नोत् पथि संधितुम् । ९ ।
तस्यास्तत्र द्विज: कश्चिदजास्वाम्यच्छिनद् रुषा । लम्बन्तं वृषणं भूय: सन्दधेऽर्थाय योगवित् ।१०॥
सम्बद्धवृषण: सोऽपि ह्यजया कूपलब्धया । कालं बहुतिथं भद्रे कामैर्नाद्यापि तुष्यति ee!
