Dis. 34 ] BOOK TEN 245

व्याया RORIOO Oe Te © tose ne आन्ना Se eat

Sore pinched with hunger a huge snake arrived in that forest by the will of Providence
and crawling, (imperceptibly), proceeded to swallow Nanda, who was lying down (there). (5)
Seized by the python, he cried, "Krsna, O enchanter of all, this huge serpentis devouring me,
O darling | (Pray,) deliver me, who have sought you as my refuge.” (6) Hearinghis cry as well
as his wailing, the cowherds sprang on their feet at once and, bewildered to see him caught
(in the coils of a boa constrictor), struck the serpent with fire-brands. (7) Though being
scorched with pieces of burning wood, the reptile did not leave Nanda. Approaching the
serpent (in the meantime), Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of the Yadus) touched the animal
with His foot. (8) (All) his evil Karma having been wiped out by the touch of the Lord's glorious
foot, the animal cast off the body of a serpent and attained a (shining) form honoured by the
Vidyadharas. (9) Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) questioned (as follows) the superhuman
being, who stood beside Him adorned with a gold necklace and bowing low with a
resplendent body:—(10) "Who are you that are shining with great splendour, endowed as
you are with a weird form ? And how were you helplessly cast into this disgusting species
(of a serpent) ?“ (11)

अहं विद्याधर: कश्चित् सुदर्शन इति श्रुत: । श्रिया स्वरूपसम्पत्त्या विमानेनाचरं fee: । १२॥
ऋषीन् विरूपानङ्गिस: wed रूपदर्पित: । तैरिमां प्रापितो योनिं see: Sa oem ies!
wa मेऽनुग्रहायैव कृतस्तै: करुणात्मभि:। यदहं लोकगुरुणा पदा स्पृष्टो हताशुभ: । १४॥
तं त्वाहं भवभीतानां प्रपन्नानां भयापहम्। आपृच्छे ज्ञापनिर्मुक्त: पादस्पर्शादमीवहन् ।१५॥
प्रपन्नोऽस्मि महायोगिन् महापुरुष सत्पते। अनुजानीहि si देव सर्वलोकेश्वरेश्वर । १६|
ब्रह्मदण्डाद् विमुक्तोऽहं सद्यस्तेऽच्युत RAMI यन्नाम गृह्णन्नखिलान् श्रोतॄनात्मानमेव च ।
सद्य: पुनाति किं भूयस्तस्य we: पदा हि ते । १७॥
इत्यनुज्ञाप्य दाशार्हं परिक्रम्याभिवन्द्य च । qe fed यात: कृच्छ्रन्नन्दश्च मोचित: । १८॥
fama कृष्णस्य तदात्मवैभवं ब्रजौकसो विस्मितचेतसस्तत: |
समाप्य तस्मिन् नियमं पुनर्व्रजं नृपाययुस्तत् कथयन्त आदृता: 1१९॥

The (erstwhile) serpent replied : "! am a Vidyadhara known by the name of Sudargana.
Endowed with (extraordinary) splendour and wealth of beauty | used to fly in an aerial car
in all directions. (12) Proud of my comeliness | laughed at seme deformed sages born in the
line of the sage Angira. | was cast into this form (of a python) through my own sin by them,
derided as they were by me. (13) (1 now feel that) the curse was pronounced by those kind-
hearted souls just in order to show their grace to me in that | have been touched with Your
foot by You, the Father of the universe, with the result that all my sins have been wiped
out.(14) Completely rid of the curse by the touch of Your feet, O Dispeller of sorrows, | ask
leave of You, the celebrated Lord, who dissipate the fears of those who are afraid of rebirth
and have sought You as their refuge. (15) | have approached You as my protector, O great
Yogi, O Supreme Person, O Protector of the righteous ! (Pray) grant me leave, O Lord, O
Ruler of rulers of all the worlds ! (16) | was immediately rid of the Brahmanas’ curse through
Your very sight, O immortal Lord ! A man uttering Your name purifies at once all those who
hear him (do so) as well as himself. What wonder, then, that I, who was actually touched by
the feet of such a Lord, viz., Yourself, should get purified (at once) !” (17) Thus taking leave
of Sri Krsna (a scion of Dasarha), going round Him (clockwise) and respectfully bowing to
Him, Sudarsana ascended fo heaven and Nanda was rescued from a perilous situation. (18)
With theit mind struck with wonder to witness such peculiar glory of Sri Krsna and completing
