Dis. 42 ] BOOK TEN 279

जविल्न्र न ee tg tt et te a ee a ae

Sri Suka began again : Proceeding further along the main road, Sri Krsna (a scion of
Madhu), who affords delight liberally to all, saw a hunchbacked young woman of comely
appearance passing (that way) with a vessel full of sandal-paste (used for smearing one's
body with) and laughingly questioned her (as follows):—(1) “Hallo ! who are you, 0
handsome woman? And for whom is this sandal-paste intended? (Please) tell us the truth.
(Pray,) give us both the excellent paste; goodwill betide you not long afterwards through this

(piece of service)." (2) ति
TTA

॥ ॥ त्रि लेपकर्मणि ।
मद्धावितं oso विना चुवां कोऽन्यतमस्तदर्हति । ३ ।
रूपपेशलमाधुर्यहसितालापवीक्षितै: । धर्षितात्मा ददौ सान्द्रमुभयोरनुलेपनम् x ।
ततस्तावङ्गरागेण स्ववर्णेतरशोभिना | सम्प्राप्तपरभागन शुशुभातेऽनुरञ्जितो । ५ ।
प्रसन्नो भगवान् Host त्रिवक्रां रुचिराननाम्। ऋज्वीं कर्तुं मनश्चक्रे दर्शयन् दर्शने फलम्। ६ |
पद्भ्यामाक्रम्य प्रपदे द्वयङ्गुल्युत्तानपाणिना । प्रगृह्य चुनुकेऽध्यात्पमुदनीनमदच्युत: । ७ |
सा तदर्जुसमानाङ्गी वृहच्छोणिपयोधरा । मुकुन्दस्पर्शनात् सद्यो बभूव प्रमदोत्तमा । ८ |

The maid-servant replied : “! am a maid-servant, Trivakra* by name, esteemed by
Karnsa for my art of preparing sandal-pastes, 0 pretty youth ! Sandal-paste prepared by me
is much to the taste of Karhsa( the ruler of the Bhojas). Who else other than you two deserves
(to have) it?" (8) Her mind bewitched by the comeliness and delicacy of form, loving
disposition, laughter. conversation and penetrating glances of the two Brothers, the
hunchback gave Them both the thick sandal-paste. (4) Painted (severally) with the pigment
which shone in contrast with Their complexion and adorned the upper part of Their body,
They then looked (most) charming. (5) The propitious Lord made up His mind to straighten
the hunchback—who was curved at three places, though possessed of a charming
countenance—(thereby) showing (to the world) the (immediate) reward of His sight. (6)
Pressing the forepart of her feet with His own feet and supporting her chin on the two (viz.,
the index and middle) fingers. raised upwards, of His open (right) hand, Sri Krsna (the
infallible Lord) straightened up her body. (7) By the (magic) touch of Sri Krsna (the Bestower
of Liberation) she then turned at once into a most beautiful woman with a straight and
symmetrical body, bulky hips and full breasts. (8)

Ta रूपगुणोदार्यसम्पन्ना we केशवम्। उत्तरीयान्तमाकृष्य wast जातहृच्छया । ९ ।

we वीर गृहं यामो न at त्यक्तुमिहोत्सहे। त्वबोन्मथितचित्ताया: प्रसीद पुरुषर्षभ gol

एवं fam याच्यमान: कृष्णो रामस्य पश्यत: । मुखं वीक्ष्यानुगानां च प्रहसंस्तामुवाच ह ।११॥

एष्यामि ते गृहं सुभ्रु: पुंसामाधिविकर्शनम् । साधितार्थोऽगृहाणां न: पान्थानां त्वं परायणम् । १२॥

विसृज्य माध्व्या वाण्या तां व्रजन् मार्गे वणिक्पथै: | नानोपायनताम्बूलस्रग्गन्थै: साग्रजोऽर्चित: 1231

तद्दर्शनस्मरक्षोभादात्मानं नाविदन् स्रिय: | विस्रस्तवास:कबरवलयालेख्यमूर्तय: । १४॥
Endowed with the wealth of beauty and good qualities, Trivakra, who had the fire of love
kindled in her heart, then smilingly submitted (as follows) to Sti Krsna (the Ruler even of
Brahma and Lord Siva). pulling the end of His upper garment—(9) "Come, O gallant youth,

let us go home. | am unable to leave you here; (hence,) be gracious to me, whose mind has
been robbed of its patience by you, O jewel among men!" (10) Being solicited by the woman

+ She was curved at three places. viz., the neck, the breast and the waist, hence the name.
