122 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9

VLE त्री कौ कोको क SHEEN ENTS KH SE TERK SEK EH See ETE HKSAR KEE OR EEE EEE Ee heh tere Gee oe Re
ज्र्त्त

अथ नवमोऽध्याय:

Discourse IX
Brahma beholds the divine Abode of the Lord and is taught by Him
the text of the Bhagavata, consisting of four couplets only

sia उवाच
आत्ममायामृते राजन् परस्यानुभवात्मन:। न घटेतार्थसम्बन्ध: स्वप्नद्रष्टुरिवाञ्जसा । १ ।
बहुरूप इवाभाति -मायया बहुरूपया । रममाणो gen ममाहमिति मन्यते । २ |
afe aa महिम्नि स्वे परस्मिन् कालमाययो: | रमेत गतसम्मोहस्त्यक्त्वोदास्ते तदोभयम् 3 ।
आत्मतत्त्वविशुद्ध्यर्थं यदाह भगवानृतम्।ब्रह्मणे दर्शयन् रूपमव्यलीकव्रतादृत: । ४ ।

Sri Suka said : Even as a man can have no connection whatsoever with the objects
(seen by him in a dream), so can the soul, that transcends all material sheaths and is
consciousness itself, have no connection in reality with the phenomena (of this world), O
king, except through the Lord's Maya (deluding potency). (1) It is on account of this
multiformed Maya that the Spirit too appears as endowed with diverse forms; and when he
begins to take delight in the material objects of sense, he develops the feeling of 'l'and'mine'
(with reference to the body and all that pertains to it). (2) Rid of all delusion, however, when
he begins to revel in the glory of his own self, whichis beyond the realm of Time and beyond
Maya (the Lord's deluding potency), he discards both these notions (of '!' and 'mine’) and
transcends the three Gunas. (3) (| now proceed to expound) the truth which the Lord was
pleased to teach Brahma, in order to enlighten him on the essential character of the Spirit,
while revealing to him His own divine form in approbation of his true penance. (4)

a आदिदेवो जगत्तां परो गुरु: स्वधिष्ण्यमास्थाय सिसृक्षयॆक्षत ।
तां नाध्यगच्छद दृशमत्र सम्मतां प्रपञ्चनिर्माणविधिर्यया भवेत्। ५ |
a चिन्तयन् द्वयक्षरमेकदाम्भस्युपाश्रृणोदु feted वचो fay: |
स्पर्शोषु यत्षोडशमेकविंशं निष्किञ्चनानां qa oa धनं विदु: । ६ ।
निशम्य तद्वक्तृदिदृक्षया दिशो बिलोक्य तत्रान्यदपपर्यमान: |
स्वधिष्ण्यमास्थाय विमृश्य तद्धितं तपस्युपादिष्ट इवादधे मन: । ७ ।
अतप्यत स्माखिललोकतापनं तपस्तपीयांस्तपतां समाहित: । ८ ।

Sitting in his own abode (the lotus from which he had emanated), that primal deity, the
supreme preceptor of all the three worlds, began to meditate with intent to proceed with the
work of creation. But he failed to obtain the vision which is regarded as valuable for this
purpose, and with the help of which the creation of the phenomenal world could be taken in
hand. (5) While he was yet absorbed in thought, Brahma (the deity presiding over the entire
creation) once heard near him in the causal waters a wordof two syllables, viz., the sixteenth
and the twenty-first letter- sounds among the twenty-five hard consonants (tand¥=74,)i.e., .
practise penance) uttered twice. Itis this penance, O Pariksit, whichis known to be the wealth
of men of renunciation. (6) On hearing this word, Brahma looked aboutin all directions, eager
to behold the speaker. But, failing to perceive any other being, he resumed his seat on the
lotus once more and, taking it to be a sound advice, set his heart on penance as if enjoined
(by the Lord). (7) That foremost ascetic of all those given to austere penance, endowed as

he was with unfailing vision, controlled his breath and mind, subdued his senses of
perception as well as his organs of action and with a composed mind practised for a period
