Dis. 13 ] BOOK THREE 191
Serer et eee eink err eer SRR AEE trie tn fe ttt ietaiot tr fri tet tt iting

from one of his nostrils, O sinless Vidura. (18) While Brahma stood looking on, the boar
in the air instantly grew to the size of an elephant, O Vidura (descendant of Bharata)! This
was really most wonderful. (19) Beholding that (strange) form of a boar, Brahma with Marici
and other Brahmanas, Sanaka and his three brothers and Swayambhuva Manu speculated
about it in various ways:—(20) "Who can be this weird creature standing in the guise of a
boar ? Oh, how strange that it came out of my nostrils! (21) Even though (at first sight) it
looked only as big as the upper part of a thumb, in an instant it grew to the size of a huge
rock. Might it be Lord Visnu Himself who is exercising my mind ?” (22) While Brahma was
thus pondering along with his sons, the Lord presiding over sacrifices (for the boar was none
other than He) who nowlooked like a huge mountain, roaredaloud. (23) The all-powerful Sri Hari
delighted Brahma and those foremost Brahmanas by His loud roar, which made the quarters
resound. (24) Hearing the roar of the_Lord disguised as a boar, which removed their
perplexity, the sages, who all belonged to the Janaloka, Tapoloka or Satyaloka, began to
extol Him through the holy Mantras of the three Vedas. (25) The Lord, whose form has been
glorified in the Vedas, took the tribute paid to His virtues by those holy men as Veda itself. He
gave a loud roar once more and, sporting like a lordly elephant, entered the waters in the interest
of the gods. (26) The divine Boar (the Saviour of the earth), who was possessed of a steel-like
frame and whose skin had a thick coat of stiff bristles, first sprang into the air, erecting His
tail and shaking His mane, and tore the clouds with His hoofs. He shone most splendid at
that time with His white tusks, shedding a lustre wherever He cast His glance. (27) Having
disguised Himself as a boar, even though He was nootherthan Lord Narayana, representing
all the sacrifices in His own person, He went smelling about with His nose in search of the
earth; and even though possessed of fearful tusks, He regarded with a gentle look the
Brahmanas (Marici and others) who were extolling Him, and dived into the water. (28) With
its bowels torn open by the headlong plunge taken by His body, which resembleda mountain
of adamant, the ocean thundered aloud and, tossing up its high waves like so many arms,
cried as it were in distress: "Protect me, O Lord of sacrifices!” (29) Cleaving the waters with
His hoofs, which were sharp as arrows, the Lord,-who represents all the sacrifices in His
person, then reached the other end of that fathomless ocean and discoveredin the depths
of it the terrestrial globe, which is the abode of all living beings, and which the Lord had
absorbed into His body while about to retire at the end of the previous Kalpa. (30)

स्वद्रंष्टयोदधृत्य महीं निमग्नां स उत्थित: संरुरुचे रसाया: |
तत्रापि aa गदयाऽऽपतन्तं सुनाभसन्दीपिततीव्रमन्यु: । ३१1
जघान रुन्धानमसह्यविक्रमं स लीलयेभं मृगराडिवाम्भसि ।
उङ्घि यथा गजेन्द्रो जगतीं fare ।३२॥
प्रज्ञाय बद्धाञ्जलयोऽनुवाकैर्विरिञ्चिमुख्या उपतस्थुरीशम् । ३३ |
The Lord shone most resplendent as He rose lifting up the earth on His tusks out of the
depths of the ocean, where it had been lying submerged. While He was yet in those waters,
a demon (Hiranyaksa by name) of irresistible prowess assailed Him with his club in order
to obstruct His way. This excited His fury, which blazed forth like His discus (Sudargana) and
He playfully disposed of him even as a lion kills an elephant without any exertion. With His
temples and snout stained by the demon’s blood He presented the appearance of a lordly
elephant that had just turned up the earth (ofa mound of red ochre). (31 -32) Evenas the Lord,

who was dark as a Taméla tree, lifted the earth (out of the water) on the ends of His white
tusks, like an elephant (carrying a lotus on his tusks), dear Vidura, Brahma (the Creator) and

