686 ` SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8

SoMa eatre a Sea iain ianiinint rnin terre whee eke hire cers ere eee He seh as hee eee eee H eee

universe and is (yet) undecaying by nature. (40)
श्रीरुद्र उवाच

कोपकालो युगान्तस्ते हतोऽयमसुरोऽल्पक: । तत्सुतं पाह्युपसृतं भक्तं ते भक्तवत्सल ।४१।

ह Rudra said : The end of a Kalpa (a thousand revolutions of the four Yugas) is the
(proper) time for (venting) Your anger and (if it was directed towards Hiranyakasipu,) this
puny demon has (already) been slain. (Pray,) protect his son (Prahrada), adevotee of Yours,
who has approached You (for shelter), O lover of (Your) devotees । (41)

eR उवाच
प्रत्यानीता: परम भवता त्रायता न: स्वभागा दैत्याक्रान्तं wes Baye प्रत्यबोधि ।
कालग्रस्तं कियदिदमहो नाथ शुश्रूषतां ते मुक्तिस्तेषां न fe बहुमता नारसिंहापरै: किम् ।४२।

Indra said : Itis Your own shares (in the sacrificial offerings) that have been recovered
by You, O supreme Lord, while protecting us; (for, seated in the hearts of us gods, itis You
who enjoy all sacrificial offerings) । (Nay,) the lotus of our heart, which is Your abode (You
being our Inner Controller), and which had till now been possessed by this demon, has been
openedby You. Oh, of what accountis this (sovereignty of the three worlds)— which is (soon)
going to be devoured by Time—in the eyes of those who are eager to serve You ? (Even)
Liberation is not thought much of by them, O Lord Narasimha; of what use (then) are other
objects (of human pursuit to them)? (42)

ऋषय ऊचु:
त्वं नस्तप: परममात्थ यदात्मतेजो येनेदमादिपुरुषात्मगतं ससर्ज |
तद् विप्रलुप्तममुनाद्य शरण्यपाल रक्षागृहीतवपुषा पुनरन्वमंस्था: ।४३॥

The Rsis sald : By this body assumed for the sake of protection (of Your devotees), O
Guardian of those needing shelter, You have once more countenanced this day (the practice
of) that supreme austerity (in the form of meditation) which You enjoined upon us, (nay,)
which is Your own glory and by (recourse to) which, O mostancient Person, You evolved this
(cosmos)—that lay merged in You——and which had been stopped by this fellow. (43)

पितर ay:
तस्योदरान्नखविदीर्णवपाद् य आर्च्छत् तस्मै नमो नृहरयेऽखिलधर्मगोप्ते ।४४॥

The manes said: This fellow forcibly appropriated and enjoyed the reverential offerings
(in the shape of balls of boiled rice etc.) given by our sons (and their descendants) and even
drank the water with sesame seeds offered by them at the time of bath in sacred waters. Hail
to that Lord Nrsirhha, the Protector of all righteousness, who recovered those offerings (as
it were) from his abdomen, the omentum of which was split open by His claws. (44)

यो नो ma amfesmmeerdie चयोगतपोबलेन ।
नानादर्पं तं नखैर्निर्ददार तस्मै Get प्रणता: स्मो नृसिंह su!

The Siddhas said : You tore with Your claws this demon, proud of his numerous
achievements, who, impious as he was, snatched by dint of Yoga (breath-control) and
asceticism our mystic powers acquired through concentration of mind. To You as such we
reverently bow, O Nrsirhha ! (45)
