wa

Dis. 87 ] BOOK TEN 489

SAAN REE ATED EE EEE ALE EMME HHS MTOR CONAN HEMET ग्र आशकाम क HEROES ARAMA!

(only) to shower their grace on you. They move about with Me purifying the world with the
dust of their feet. (51) The (images of) gods, holy places and sacred waters purify one slowly
by sight, touch and worship after a long time; the saints (however) do so at once. (Nay,) the
gods etc., too derive their purificatory virtue through the very sight of exalted souls. (52) (O
Srutadeva !) the Brahmana by his very birth is superior to all beings in this creation, the more
so if he is endowed with austerity, learning, contentment and devotion to Me.(53) (Even) this
Personality of Mine, endowed as it is with four arms, is not dearer to Me than the Brahmana.
Indeed the Brahamana is an embodiment of all the Vedas, while | am the embodiment of all
gods. (54) Men of crooked understanding, who do not know this truth, regard (only ) idols as
worthy of adoratign and, full of jealousy, disregard the Brahmana, the preceptor of the world,
who is the same as | and their (very) soul. (55) By perceiving Me in all a Brahmana bears in
his mind that this universe consisting of mobile and immobile creation and the (various)
categories (such as the Mahat-tattva) that contribute to its existence are (but) My manifestations.
(56) Therefore, O Srutadeva, worship these Brahmana sages with faith, regarding them as
My own selves. If you do so, । shall have been directly worshipped, but not by any other
means, (even) through enormous (expenditure of) wealth and show of splendour. (57)

श्रीगुक उवाच
स इत्थं प्रभुणाऽऽदिष्ट: सहकृष्णान् द्विजोत्तमान्। आराध्यैकात्मभावेन मैथिलश्चाप सद्गतिम् । ५८1
एवं स्वभक्तयो राजन् भगवान् भक्तभक्तिमान्। उपित्वाऽदिश्य सन्मार्गं पुनर्द्दरवतीमगात् ।५९॥

Sri Sukadeva said : Instructed as aforesaid by the Lord, Srutadeva worshipped Him as
well as the sages as one with their own self, and (through their grace) attained oneness with
God (the goal of the pious). Bahulaswa (the king of Mithila) too attained the same (exalted)
state. (58) Pariksit ! (just as the devotee loves God), God (too) loves the devotee. He

(therefore) stayed on with His two devotees and, having taught them the ways of the
righteous, returned to Dwaraka. (59)

Thus ends the eighty-sixth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's Grace on Srutadeva’,
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- Purana,
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

अथ सप्ताशीतितमोऽध्याय:

Discourse LXXXVII
A Song of Praise uttered by the Vedas (in their living form)
परीक्षिदुवाच
व्रह्मन् ब्रह्मण्यनिर्देये निर्गुणे शुणवृत्तय: । कथं चरन्ति श्रुतय: साक्षात् सदसत: परे । १ ।

Pariksit submitted : How can the Sruti texts, dealing as they do with the (three) Gunas
(material phenomena), refer directly to Brahma (the Absolute), which is indefinable and
beyond the (three) Gunas and transcends (both) the Cause (the Unmanifest) as well as the
