Dis.'7 | `` BOOK TWELVE 695

ag eG RRA WA AM AIGA ARAMA IIIA RIA ENE AI ASAP AAI IAS EASE I SE IIIS LIAS IE IIS TS, eSB SRA Ho

the mouth of my father (Romaharsana), the pupil of Vedavyasa; while I, as their pupil, studied

all the collections. (6) Kasyapa, Savarni, Paragurama's pupil Akrtavrana and myself

(Ugrasrava) leamt four (more) original collections from (my father) Romaharsana (pupil of

Vyasa). (7

Tne ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मर्षिभिर्निरूपितम्। yy बुद्धिमाश्रित्य वेदशास्त्रानुसारत: । ८ ।
सर्गोऽस्याथ विसर्गश्च at रक्षान्तराणि च। वंद्मो वंशानुचस्तिं संस्था हेतुरपाश्रय: । ९ ।
दशभिर्लक्षणैर्युक्तं पुराणे तद्विदो fag: | केचित् पञ्चविधं ब्रह्मन् महदल्पव्यवस्थया ।१०॥
अव्याकृतगुणक्षोभान्महतस्रिवृतोऽहम: । भूतमात्रेद्दियार्थानां सम्भव: at उच्यते ।११॥
पुरुषानुगृहीतानामेतेषां वासनामय: । विसर्गोऽयं समाहारो बीजाद् बीजं चराचरम् । १२1
वृत्तिर्भूतानि भूतानां चराणामचराणि च । कृता Ba FN तत्र कामाच्चोदनयापि वा ।१३॥
रक्षाच्युतावतारेहा विश्वस्यानु युगे युगे । तिर्यङ्घर्त्यर्षिदेवेषु हन्यन्ते यैस्त्रयीद्विष: ।१४॥
waa मनुर्देवा मनुपुत्रा: सुरेश्वर: | ॠषयोंऽशावतारश्च हरेर षड्विधमुच्यते ।१५॥
राज्ञां ब्रह्मप्रसूतानां वंदास्त्रैकालिकोऽन्वय: | वंशानुचरितं तेषां वृत्तं वंदाधराश्च BRE!
Stan: प्राकृतिको नित्य आत्यन्तिको लय: । संस्थेति कविभि: प्रोक्ता चतुर्धास्य स्वभावत: 19
हेतुर्जीवोऽस्य सगदिरविद्याकर्मकारक: । यं चानुशयिनं प्राहुरव्याकृतमुतापरे । १८
व्यतिरेकान्वयो gel जाग्रत्स्वप्नसुषुप्तिषु। मायामयेषु aq wa जीववृत्तिष्रपाश्रय: ।१९।
पदार्थेषु यथा we सन्मात्रं रूपनामसु ।ब्रीजादिपञ्चतान्तासु ह्यवस्थासु युतायुतम् Rol
त्निस्मैतयदाचित्तंहित्वावृसिन्रयंस्वयम्।योगेनव्रातदाऽज्यानंवेदेहत्यागिर्काते।२१।

(Now) hear, 0 Brahmana sage | with a clear mind, the characteristics of the Puranas as
determined by Brahmana seers according to (the viewpoint of) the Vedas and Sastras. (8)
Those well-versed in the Puranas declare the Puranas as distinguished by tén features
(discussing the following ten topics), viz., Sarga (creation) of the universe, Visarga, Vriti,
Raksa, the Manvantaras, Varhgas (dynasties of kings), Varnganucarita, Sarstha, Hetu and
Apasraya.” Some teachers recognize the features of the Puranas as fivefold (only), O
Saunaka! side by side with the distinction of great and small (according as they deal with ten
topics or fivet only). (9-10) The evolution of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence)
through the disturbance in the equilibrium of the three Gunas constituting the Unmanifest
(Primordial Matter), of the threefold Ahankara (from the Mahat-tattva) and (from the threefold
Ahankara) of the five subtle elements, the (eleven) Indriyas (the five senses of perception
and the five organs or action and the mind), and their objects (viz., the five gross elements
as well as of the deities presiding over the senses) is called Sarga or creation. (11) Visarga
is (the name of) this collective creation, both mobile and immobile, of the aforesaid (causal
principles) fecundated by the Supreme Person (God), and brought about by the latencies of
(past) Karma (of the countless Jivas), proceeding from seed to seed (as a countinuum). (12)
वा च्न्र

* These terms have already been mentioned with some variations in Il. x. 37. The words ‘Vrtt' and 'Raksa’ should be
taken as synonymous with 'Sthana’ and "Posana’ occurring in that text: what has been referred to here under the name of
‘Yarnganucarita’ should be taken to mean ‘Ianukatha’ the word Safaistha should be understood in the sense of 'Nirodha, and
also as covering the idea of 'Mukti'; and the word 'Hetu should be construed to mean ‘Uti’ a ‘Apasraya’ of course is the same
as Asraya’.

+The five features are:—Sarga and Pratisarga. Varngas and the Manvantaras and Varhsanucantas, as the following
couplet shows:—

wig प्रतमर्गश्च वंशो मन्वन्तराणि च । वंशानुर्चारतं aie पुराणं पञ्चलक्षणम् ॥

The other five are understood as Included in these.

