THE VISNU-PURANAM
BOOK I

..

प्रथमाश:

CHAPTER 1
।।प्रथमोऽध्याय::॥

(मङ्गलाचरणम्, पराशरं प्रति मैत्रेयस्य प्रश्न:,
पराशरस्योत्तरदानञ्च)
ॐ नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय।
जितं ते पुण्डरीकाक्ष नमस्ते विश्वभावन।
नमस्तेऽस्तु हृषीकेश महापुरुष पूर्वज।। १।।

OM ! glory to Vasudeva'— Victory be to
you, Pundarikdksa, adoration be’ to you,
Visvabhavana; glory be to you, Hrsikesa,
Mahapurusa, and Parvaja’.

सदक्षरं Fa य ईश्वर: पुमान्

स नोऽस्तु विष्णुर्मति-भूति-मुक्तिद:॥ २॥

May that Visnu, who is the existent,
imperishable, Brahma, who is Isvara,* who is
spirit;’ who with the three qualities’ is the
cause of creation, preservation, and
destruction, who is the parent of nature,
intellect, and the other ingredients of the
universe’; be to us the bestrew of
understanding, wealth and final emancipation.

प्रणम्य विष्णुं विश्वेशं ब्रह्मादीन् प्रणिपत्य च।
Te प्रणम्य वक्ष्यामि पुराणं वेदसम्मितम्।। ३॥
इतिहासपुराणज्ञं वेदवेदाङ्गपारगम्।
धर्मशास्त्रादितत्त्वज्ञं वसिष्ठतनयात्मजम्।। ४॥
पराशरं मुनिवरं कृतपूर्वाह्लिकक्रियम्।

मैत्रेय: परिपप्रच्छ प्रणिपत्याभिवाद्य च।। ५॥

Having adored Visnu’, the lord of all, and
paid reverence to Brahma and the rest*; having
also saluted the spiritual preceptor, I will
narrate a Purana equal in sanctity to the Vedas,
Maitreya,’ having saluted him reverentially,

thus addressed ParaSara, the excellent sage, the
grandson of Vasistha, who was versed in
traditional history and the Puranas; who was
acquainted with the Vedas and the branches of
science dependent upon them; and skilled in
law and philosophy; and who had performed
the morning rites of devotion.

भैत्रेय उवाच

wan fe वेदाध्ययनमधीतमखिलं गुरो।
धर्मशास्त्राणि सर्वाणि वेदाङ्गानि यथाक्रमम्।। ६॥
त्वत्प्रसादान्मुनिश्रेष्ठ मामन्ये नाकृतश्रमम्।
वक्ष्यन्ते सर्वशास्त्रेषु प्रायशो येऽपि विद्विष:।। ७॥
सोऽहमिच्छामि anig: stg त्वत्तो यथा जगत्।
बभूव भ्रूयश्च यथा महाभाग भविष्यति।। ८।।

SUES जगद् ब्रह्मन् यतश्चैतच्चराचरम्।

लीनमासीद् यथा यन्र लयमेष्यति यत्र च।। ९॥

यत्प्रमाणानि भूतानि देवादीनाञ्च सम्भवम्।

समुद्र-पर्वतानां च संस्थानञ्च तथा भुव:॥ १०॥

Maitreya said— Master! I have been
instructed by you in the whole of the Vedas,
and in the institutes of law and of sacred
science; through your favour, other men, even
though they be my foes, cannot accuse me of
having been remiss in the acquirement of
knowledge. I am now desirous, oh you who
are profound in piety! to hear from you, how
this world was, and how in future it will be?
What is its substance, oh Brahman, and
whence proceeded animate and inanimate
things? Into what has it been resolved, and
into what will its dissolution again occur?
How were the elements manifested? Whence
proceeded the gods and other beings? What
are the situation and extent of the oceans and
the mountains, the earth, the sun, and the
planets?
