202 THE VISNU-PURANAM

पित-देव-मनुष्यादीनेवमाप्याययत्यसौ।। २५॥ Arvavasu, and Svar4j, supplying heat severally to

the moon, the stars, and to Mercury, Venus, Mars,

vargterg देवानां पिंत्णह्यैव पासिकीम्' Jupiter and Saturn.
शश्वत्तृप्तिञ्ज मर्त्यनां मैत्रेयार्क: प्रयच्छति।। २६॥ eee
।॥इति विष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे एकादशोऽध्याय:।।

The sovereign sun, oh Brahman, the cause
of day and night, perpetually revolves,
affording delight to the gods, to the
progenitors, and to mankind. Cherished by the
Susumna ray of the sun,’ the moon is fed to
the full in the fortnight of its growth; and in
the fortnight of its wane the ambrosia of its
substance is perpetually drunk by the
immortals, unitl the last day of the half month,
when the two remaining digits are drunk by
the progenitors : hence these two orders of
beings are nourished by the sun. The moisture
of the earth, which the sun attracts by his rays,
he again parts with for the fertilization of the
grain, and the nutriment of all terrestrial
creatures; and consequently the sun is the
source of subsistence to every class of living
things, to gods, progenitors, mankind, and the
rest. The sun, Maitreya, satisfies the wants of
the gods for a fortnight (at a time); those of the
progenitors once a month; and those of men
and other animals daily.

RE

NOTES

1. This mysticism originates in part apparently
from a misapprehension of metaphorical texts of
the Vedas, such as सैषा त्रय्येव विद्या तपति। ‘that triple
knowledge (the Vedas) shines;’ and ऋचस्तपन्ति। ‘the
hymns of the Rk shine;’ and in part from the
symbolization of the light of religious truth by the
light of the sun, as in the Gayatri ch. VIII. n. 13. To
these are to be added the sectarial notions of the
Vaisnavas.

2. The formul of the SdAma-veda are not to be
used along with those of the Rk and Yajush, at
sacrifices in general.

3. The Vayu, Linga, and Matsya Purana specify
several of the rays of the sun from amongst the
many thousands which they say proceed from him.
Of these, “seven are principal, termed Susumna,
Harikesga, Visvakarman, Visvakarya, Sampadvasu.
