BOOK V, CHAP. ६ 459

यत्राम्बु विन्यस्य बलिर्म्मनोज्ञा- “Alas! he wt despise me, or |
connexion with Kansa, an associate with evi

. । though not contaminated by it. How vain is his

तथामरत्वं त्रिदशाधिपत्यं birth, who is shunned by the virtuous? and yet

भन्वन्तरं पूर्णमपेतशत्रु:। ३ १॥

When Akrira sow these two youths, his
countenance expanded with delight, and the
down of his body stood erect with pleasure:
for this he thought to be supreme happiness
and glory; this, the double manifestation of the
divine Vasudeva; this was the twofold
gratification of his sight, to behold the creator
of the universe: now he hoped that his bodily
form would yield fruit, as it would bring him
in contact with the person of Krsna; and that
the wearer of infinite forms would place his
hand on his back; the touch of whose finger
alone is sufficient to dispel sin, and to secure
imperishable felicity: that hand which
launches the fierce irresistible discus, blazing
with all the flames of fire, lightning, and the
sun, and slaughtering the demon host washes
the collyrium from the eyes of their brides:
that hand into which Bali poured water, and
thence obtained ineffable enjoyments below
the earth, and immortality and dominion over
the gods for a whole Manvantara, without peril
from a foe.

अप्येष मां कंसपरिग्रहेण
दोषास्पदीभूतमदोषदुष्टम्।
कर्त्तवमानोपहतं धिगस्तु
तज्जन्मन: साधुबहिष्कृतं यत्।। ३ २॥
ज्ञानात्मकस्यामलसत्त्वराशे
रपेतदोषस्य सदा स्फुटस्य।
fe वा जगत्यत्र समस्तपुंसा-
मज्ञातमस्यास्ति Ble स्थितस्य।। ३३॥
तस्मादहं भक्तिविनम्रचेता
व्रजामि सर्वेश्चरमीश्वराणाम्।
: { परुषो
अनादिमध्यान्तमयस्य विष्णो:।। ३४॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे सम्तदश: अध्याय:।।

what is there in this world unknown to him
who resides in the hearts of all men, who is
ever existent, exempt from imperfection, the
aggregate of the quality of purity, and identical
with true knowledge? With a heart wholly
devoted to him, then, I will approach the lord
of all lords, the descended portion of Purus
oatama, of Visnu, who is without beginning,
middle, or end.”
NOTES

1, The commentator explains this to mean
Hayagriva, or Visnu with the neck and head of a
horse; who, it is said in the second book of the
Bhagavata, appeared at the end of a great sacrifice
performed by Brahma, and breathed from his
nostrils the texts of the Vedas. The fourth Avatara
is always elsewhere said to be the Vamana. or
dwarf.

Ke
