BOOK III, CHAP. §

249

down before Aurva, the descendant of Bhrgu,

whatever extent, whether much or little, he

asked him what were the best means of receives it, when Acyuta is content with him.

pleasing Visnu and what would be the
consequence of obtaining his favour.

ait sara
भौमान् मनोरथान् स्वर्गान् स्वर्गिब्धं तथास्पदम्।
प्राप्नोत्याराधिते विष्णौ निर्वाणमपि चोत्तमम्।६॥
ag यदिच्छति यावच्च फलमाराधितेऽच्युते।
तत् तदाप्नोति राजेन्द्र! aft स्वल्पमथापि वा॥७॥
ay पृच्छसि भूपाल। कथमाराध्यते हि स:।
तदहं सकलं तुभ्यं कथयामि Frater Bc
वर्णाश्रमाचारवता पुरुषेण पर: पुमान्।
विष्णुराराध्यते पन्था नान्यत् तत्तोषकारणम्॥ ९॥
यजन् यज्ञान् यजत्येनं जपत्येनं नृप!
घ्नंस्तथान्यां हिनस्त्येनं सर्वभूतो यतो हरि:॥ gon
तस्मात् सदाचारवता पुरुषेण जनार्दन:।
आराध्यते स्ववर्णोक्त-धर्मानुष्ठानकारिणा॥ ११॥
स्वधर्मतत्परो विष्णुमाराधयति नान्यथा॥ १२॥
परापवादं पैशुन्यमनृतञ्च न भाषते।
अन्योद्देगकरञ्चापि तोष्यते तेन केशव:। १३॥
परपत्नी-परद्रव्य-परहिंसासु यो मतिम्।
न करोति पुमान् ye! तोष्यते तेन केशव:।। १४॥
न ताडयति नो हन्ति प्राणिनोऽन्यांश्च देहिन:।
यो मनुष्यो मनुष्येन्द्र! तोष्यते तेन केशव:। १५॥
देव-द्विज-गुरूणां य: शुश्रूषासू सदोद्यत:।
त्तोष्यते त्तेन गोविन्द: पुरुषेण नरेश्वर।। १६॥
यथात्मनि च पुत्रे च सर्वभूतेषु यस्तथा।
हितकामो हरिस्तेन सर्वदा तोष्यते सुखम्। १७॥
यस्य रागादिदोषेण न दुष्टं नृप! मानसम्।
विशुद्धचेतसा विष्णुस्तोष्यते तेन सर्वदा।। १८॥
वर्णाश्रमेषु ये धर्मा: शास्त्रोक्ता नृपसत्तम!
तेषु तिष्ठन् नरो विष्णुमाराधयति नान्यथा।। १९॥

Aurva replied, "He who pleases Visnu
obtains all terrestrial enjoyments; heaven and
a place in heaven; and what is best of all, final
liberation whatever he wishes and to

In what manner his favour is to be secured,
that also I will, oh king, impart to you,
agreeably to your desire. The supreme Visnu
is propitiated by a man who observes the
institutions of caste order and purifactory
practices; no other path is the way to please
him. He who offers sacrifices, sacrifices to
him; he who murmurs prayer, prays to him; he
who injures living creatures, injures him; for
Hari is all beings. Janardana therefore is
propitiated by him who is attentive to
established observances and follows the duties
prescribed for his caste. The Brahmana, the Ks
atriya, the Vaisya and the Sidra, who attends
to the rules enjoined by his caste, best
worships Visnu. Kesava is most pleased with
him who docs good to others' who never utters
abuse, calumny or untruth; who never covets
another's wife or another's wealth and who
bears ill-will towards none; who neither beats
nor slays any animate or inanimate thing; who
is ever diligent in the service of the gods, of
the Brahmanas and of his spiritual preceptor;
who is always desirous of the welfare of all
creatures, of his children and of his own soul;
in whose pure heart no pleasure is derived
from the imperfections of love and hatred. The
man, oh monarch, who conforms to the duties
enjoined by scriptural authority for every caste
and condition of life, is he who best worships
Visnu: there is no other mode."

सगर उवाच
तथैवाश्नमधर्मांश्च द्विजवर्य ? ब्रवीहि तान्।। २०॥

Aurva having thus spoken, Sagara said to
him, “Tell me then, venerable Brahmana, what
are the duties of caste and condition:* I am
desirous of knowing them."

aid sara
त्वमेकाग्रमना भूत्वा शृणु धर्मान् मयोदितान्॥। २१॥
