408

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Kosalas, Tamralipta and the sea coast; so far
conforming with our text as to include the western
parts of Bengal, Tamluk, Midnapur and Orissa. One
copy reads Andhra, perhaps for Odra, Orissa; and
one has Campa for the capital, which is probably an
error, although the two other MSS., being still more
faulty, do not offer the means of correction.

72. The Vayu has the same, The countrics are
parts of Orissa and Berar.

73. The Vayu has sons of Manidhanya for the
ruling dynasty, but names the countries those of the
Naisadhas, Yudakas, Saigikas and Kalatoyas. The
first name applies to a tract of country near the
Vindhya mountains, but the last to a country in the
north. The west or south-west, however, is
probably intended in this place.

74. The Stri Rajya is usually placed in Bhote. It
may perhaps here designate Malabar, where
polyandry equally prevails. Misika or the country
of thieves, was the pirate coast of the Konkan. The
Vayu reads Bhoksyaka or Bhokhyaka for Misika ;
स्तीराज्यं भोक्ष्यकांश्चैव भोक्ष्यन्ति कनकाद्वया:। The Bhagavata
omits all these specifications subsequent to the
notice of Visvasphirtti.

75. From this we might infer that the Visnu
Purana was compiled when the Mohammedans
were making their first encroachments on the west.
They scem to have invaded and to have settled in
Sindh early in the eighth century, although Indian
princes continued on the Indus for a subsequent
period. Scriptor, Arab. De rebus  Indicis.
Gildemeister, p.6. They were engaged in hostilitics
in 698 or 700 with prince of Kabul, in whose name,
however disguised by its Mohammedan
representations of Ratil, Ratbal or Ratibal, it is not
difficult to recognise the genuine Hindu appellation
of Ratanpal or Ratnapal. Their progress in this
direction has not been traced; but at the period of
their invasion of sindh they advanced to Multan
and probably established themselves there and at
Lahore within a century. Kashmir they did not
occupy till a much later date and the Raja
Tarangini takes no notice of any attacks upon it;
but the Chinese have recorded an application from
the king of Kashmir, Chin-tho-lo-pi-li, evidently
the Candrapida of the Sanskrit, for aid against the
Arabs, about A.D. 713. Gildemeister, p. 13.
Although, therefore, not actually settled at the
Punjab so early as the beginning, they had

commenced their incursions and had no doubt
made good their footing by the end of the eighth or
commencement of the ninth century. This age of
the Purdéna is compatible with reference to the
contemporary race of Gupta kings, from the fourth
or fifth to the seventh or eighth century; or if we are
disposed to go farther back, we may apply the
passage to the Greek and Indo-Scythian princes. It
seems more likely to be the former period; but in
all such passages in this or other Puranas there is
the risk that verses inspired by the presence of
Mohammedan rulers may have been interpolated
into the original text. Had the Mohammedans of
Hindustan, however, been intended by the latter,
the indications would have bcen more distinct and
the localities assigned to them more central. Even
the Bhagavata, the date of which we have good
reason for conjecturing to be the middle of the
twelfth century and which influenced the form
assumed about that time by the worship of Visnu,
cannot be thought or refer to the Mohammedan
conquerors of upper India. It is there stated, that
‘rulers fallen from their castes or Sidras, will be the
princes of Saurastra, Avanti, Abhira, Sara, Arbuda
and Malava; and barbarians, Sidras and other
outcastcs, not enliglitened by the Vedas, will
possess Kashmir, Kaunti and the banks of the
Candrabhaga and Indus :` सौराष्ट्रावन्त्यभीराश्चशूरा
seer: | arent द्विजा भविष्यन्ति शूद्रप्राया: जनाधिपा:।
सिन्धोस्तटं चन्द्रभागां कौन्तीं काप्मीरमण्डलं। भोक्ष्यन्ति शूद्रा व्रात्याद्या
म्लेच्छा अब्रह्मवर्च्चस॥ Now it was not until the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries that the
Mohammedans established themselves in Gujarat
and Malva and the Bhagavata was unquestionably
well known in various parts of India long before
that time. (Account of Hindus Sects. As. Res. Vol.
XVI). It cannot therefore allude to Mohammedans.
By specifying the princes as seceders from the
Vedas, there is no doubt that the barbarians and
outcastes intended are so only in a religious sense;
and we know from indisputable authorities that the
western countries, Gujarat, Abu, Malava, were the
chief seats, first of the Buddhists and then of the
Jainas, from a period commencing perhaps before
the Christian era and scarcely terminating with the
Mohammedan conquest. Inscriptions from Abu, As.
Res. Vol. XVI.

76. The commentator, having no doubt the
existing state of things in view, interprets the
