280

them, after they have rinsed their mouths,
upon seats. An uneven number of Brahmanas
is to be invited in sacrifices to the manes; an
even or uneven number in those presented to
the gods; or one only on each occasion.°

पितॄणामयुजो युग्मान् देवानामिच्छया द्विजान्।
देवानामेकमेकं वा पितॄणाञ्च नियोजयेत्॥ १४॥
त्तथा मातामंहश्राद्धं वैश्चदेवसमन्वितम्।

कुर्वीत भक्तिसम्पन्नस्तन्त्रं वा वैश्वदैविकम्।। १५॥
पितृमातामहानाञ्च भोजयेच्चाप्युदङ्मुखान्।। १६॥
पृथक् तयो: केचिदाहु: श्राद्धस्य करणं नृप।
एकम्रैकेन पाकेन वदन्त्यन्ये महर्षय:॥ १७॥

"Then let the householder, inspired by
religious faith, offer oblations to the maternal
grandfather, along with the worship of the
Visvadevas’ or the ceremony called
Vaisvadeva, which comprehends offerings to
both paternal and maternal ancesiors and to
ancestors in general. Let him feed the
Braéhmanas who are appropriated to the gods
and to maternal ancestors, with their faces to
the north; and those set apart for the paternal
ancestors and ancestors in general, with their
faces to the east. Some say that the viands of
the Sraddha should be kept distinct for these
two sets of ancestors, but others maintain that
they are to be fed with the same food, at the
same time.

विष्टरार्थं कुशान् दत्त्वा सम्पूज्यार्घ्यविधानत:।
कुर्यादावाहनं प्राज्ञो देवानां तदनुज्ञया।। १८॥
यवाम्बुना च देवानां दद्यादर्घ्य विधानवित्।
स्रग-गन्ध-धूप-दीपांश्च तेभ्यो Tere यथाविधि। १९॥
पितॄणामपसव्यं aq सर्वमेवोपकल्पयेत्।
अनुज्ञाञ्चं तत: प्राप्य erat दर्भान् द्विधाकृतान्॥। २०॥
मन्त्रपूर्वं पितृणान्तु कूर्याच्चावांहनं बुध:।

तिलाम्बुना चापसव्यं दद्यादर्घध्यादिकं नृप॥ २१॥
काले तत्रातिथिं प्राप्तमन्नकामं नृपाध्वगम्।
ब्राह्मणैरभ्यनुज्ञात: कामं तमपि भोजयेत्।। २२॥
योगिनो विविधै रूपैर्नराणामुपकारिण:।

भ्रमन्ति पृथिवीमेतामविज्ञातस्वरूपिण:।। २३॥

concurrence of the

THE VISNU-PURANAM

तस्मादभ्यर्चयेत् प्राप्तं श्राद्धकालेऽतिथिं बुध:।
श्राद्धक्रियाफलं हन्ति नरेन्द्रापूजितोऽतिथि:॥ २४॥

Having spread Kusa grass for seats and
offered libations according to rule, let the
sensible man. invoke the deities, with the
Brahmanas who are
present, Let the man who is acquainted with
the ritual offer a libation to the gods with
water and barley, having presented to thém
flowers, perfumes and incense. Let him offer
the same to the Pitrs, placed upon his left; and
with the consent of the Brahmanas, having
first provided seats of Kuga grass doubled, let
him invoke with the usual prayers the manes
to the ceremony, offering a libation, on his left
hand, of water and sesamum. He will then,
with the permission of the Brahmanas, give
food to any guest who arrives at the time or
who is desirous of victuals or who is passing
along the road; for holy saints and ascetics,
benefactors of mankind, are traversing this
earth, disguised in various shapes.” On this
account let a prudent man welcome a person
who arrives at such a season; for inattention to
a guest frustrates the consequences of an
ancestral offering.

जुहुयाद् व्यञ्जनक्षारवर्जमन्नं ततोऽनले।

अनुज्ञातो द्विजैस्तैस्तु त्रिकृत्व: पुरुषर्षभ।। २५॥
अग्नये कव्यवाहाय स्वाहेत्यादौ नृपाहुति:।
सोमाय वै पितृमते aren तदनन्तरम्॥ २६॥
वैवस्वताय चैवान्या तृतीया दीयते तत:।
हुतावशिष्टमल्पाल्पं पितृपात्रेषु Feta २७॥
ततोऽन्न मिष्टमत्यर्थमभीष्टमतिसंस्कृतम्।

दत्त्वा जुषध्वमिच्छातो वाच्यमेतदनिष्ठुरम्॥ २८॥
भोक्तव्यं तैश्च तच्चित्तैर्मौनिभि: सुमुखै: सुखम्।
अक्रुध्यता चात्वरता SA तेनापि भक्तित:।। २९॥

"The sacrificer is then to offer food,
without salt or seasoning, to fire.'° three
several times, with the consent of the assistant
Braéhmanas; exclaiming first, 'To fire, the
vehicle of the oblations; to the manes Svaha!'
Next addressing the oblation to Soma, the lord
of the progenitors; and giving the third to
