BOOK II, CHAP. 7

183

ईदृशानां तथा aa कोटिकोटिशतानि च।। २७॥
दारुण्यग्निर्यथा det तिले तद्वत् पुमानपि।
प्रधानेऽवस्थितो व्यापी चेतनात्मात्मवेदन:। २८॥
WIE पुमांश्चैव सर्वभूतात्मभूतया।
विष्णुशक्त्या महाबुद्धे! वृतौ संश्रयधर्मिणौ॥ २९॥
Wat: Sa पृथग्भावकारणं संश्रयस्य च।
क्षोभकारणभूता च सर्गकाले ARTA ३०॥

The world is encompassed on every side
and above and below by the shell of the egg of
Brahm, in the same manner as the seed of the
wood-apple® is invested by its rind. Around
the outer surface of the shell flows water, for a
space equal to ten times the diameter of the
world. The waters, again, are encompassed
exteriorly by fire; fire by air; and air by Mind;
Mind by the origin of the elements
(Ahamkara); and that by Intellect: each of
these extends ten times the breadth of that
which it encloses; and the last is encircled by
the chief Principle, Pradhana,° which is
infinite, and its extent cannot be enumerated:
it is therefore called the boundless and
illimitable cause of all existing things,
supreme nature, or Prakrti; the cause of all
mundane eggs, of which there are thousands
and tens of thousands, and millions and
thousands of millions, such as has been
described.’ Within Pradhana resides Soul,
diffusive, conscious, and self-irradiating, as
fire is inherent in flint,® or sesamum oil in its
seed. Nature (Pradhana) and soul (Puman) are
both of the character of dependents, and are
encompassed by the energy of Visnu, which is
one with the soul of the world, and which is
the cause of the separation of those two (soul
and nature) at the period of dissolution; of
their aggregation in the continuance of things;
and of their combination at the season of
creation.’

यथा Viet जले वातो बिभत्ति कणिकाशतम्।
जगच्छक्तिस्तथा विष्णो: प्रधानपुरुषात्मिका।। ३ १
यथा च पादपो मूलस्क्धशाखादिसंयुत:।

आदिबीजात् प्रभवति बीजान्यन्यानि वै तत:॥ ३ २॥
प्रभवन्ति ततस्तेभ्य: सम्भवन्त्यपरे दुमा:।

तेऽपि तल्लक्षणद्रव्यकारणानुगता BT ३३॥
`विशेषान्तास्ततस्तेभ्य: सम्भवन्त्यसुरादय:॥ ३४॥
तेभ्यश्च पुत्रास्तेषाञ्च पुत्राणामपरे सुता:।

बीजाद बृक्षप्ररौहेण यथा नापचयस्तरो:।

भूतानां भूतसर्गेण नैवास्त्यपचयस्तथा।। ३५॥
सन्निधानाद् यथाकाशकालाद्या: कारणं तरो:।
तथैव परिणामेन विश्वस्य भगवान् हरि:।॥३६॥

In the same manner as the wind ruffles the
surface of the water in a hundred bubbles,
which of themselves are inert, so the energy of
Visnu influences the world, consisting of inert
nature and soul. Again, as a tree, consisting of
root, stem, and branches, springs from a
primitive seed, and produces other seeds,
whence grow other trees analogous to the first
in species, product, and origin, so from the
first unexpended germ (of nature, or Pradhana)
spring Mahat (Intellect) and the other
rudiments of things; from them proceed the
grosser elements; and from them men and
gods, who are succeeded by sons and the sons
of sons. In the growth of a tree from the seed,
no detriment occurs to the parent plant, neither
is there any waste of beings by the generation
of others. In like manner as space and time and
the rest are the cause of the tree (through the
materiality of the seed), so the divine Hari is
the cause of all things by successive
developments (through the materiality of
nature),’° `

काण्डं कोषस्तथा पुष्पं क्षीरं AEA तण्डुला:॥ ३७॥
तुषा: कणाश्च सन्तो वै यान्त्याविर्भावमात्मन:।
प्ररोहहेतुसामग्रीमासाद्य मुनिसत्तम।। ३ ८॥

तथा कर्मस्वनेकेषु देवाद्या: समवस्थिता:।
विष्णुशक्तिं समासाद्य प्ररोहमुपयान्ति वै।। ३९॥

As all the parts of the future plant, existing
in the seed of rice, or thé root, the culm, the
