380

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Krpa and Krpi. The latter became the wife of
Drona and the mother of Asvatthdman.

दिवोदासस्य मित्रयु:) मित्रयोश्चयवनो नाम राजा,
च्यवनात् सुदास:, तत: सौदास: सहदेव:, तस्यापि
सोमक:, ततो Wy: शतपुत्रज्येष्ठोऽभवत्। तेषां यवीयान्
पृषत:, THANE दुपद:), तस्माद धृष्टद्युम्न:, THN धृष्टकेतु:।

The son of Divodasa was Mitrayu;™ his son
was Cyavana; his son was Sudasa; his son was
Saudasa, also called Sahadeva; his son was
Somaka; he had a hundred sons, of whom
Jantu was the eldest and Prsata the youngest.
The son of Prsata was Drupada; his son was
Dhrstadyumna; his son was Drstaketu.

अजमीढस्यान्य ऋक्षनामा पुत्रोऽभूत। ऋक्षात् संवरण:),
संवरणात् कुरु:, य इदं धर्मक्षेत्रं HEF चकार!।। १८॥

सुधनु- -र्जहनु- परिक्षित्प्रष्ठुखा क्वरो पुत्रा वभूवु:।
ततश्चोपरिचरो वसु:। बृहद्रथप्नत्यप्रकुंशाप्तमावेल्ल
मत्स्यप्रमुखा वसो: Yat: सप्ताजायन्त। बृहद्रथात् कुशाग्र:
तस्मादृषभ:,/ ad: पुष्पवान्, तस्मात् Gia, तस्य च
जन्तु:। FMEA: शकलद्दयजन्मा wer सन्धितो
WUT नाम। तस्मात् सत्यधृत: THM सहदेव:, aa:
सोमापि: तत: श्रुतश्रवा:. इत्येते मागधा ATT १९॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे एकोनविश: अध्याय:॥

Another son of Ajamidha was named Rks
a;>’ his son was Samvarana; his son was Kuru,
who gave his name to the holy district Kuruks
etra; his sons were Sudhanus, Jahnu, Pariksit
and many others. The son of Sudhanus was
Suhotra; his son was Cyavana; his son was
Krtaka;*° his son was Uparicara the Vasu,°
who had seven children, Vrhadratha,
Pratyagra, Kusaémba, Mavella, Matsya and
others. The son of Vrhadratha was Kusagra;
his son was Rsabha;** his son was Puspavat;
his son was Satyadhrta;” his son was
Sudhanvan; and his son was Jantu. Vrhadratha
had another son, who being born in two parts,
which were put together (sandhita) by a
female fiend named Jata, he was denominated
Jarasandha;” his son was Sahadeva; his son

was Somapi;” his son was Srutasravas.
These were kings of Magadha.

NOTES
1. Abhayada Vayu. Vitamaya Agni.
Vatdyudha : Matsya. Carupada ; Bhagavata. The

Mahabharata, Adi Parva, p. 136, 138, has two
accounts of the descendants of Puru, differing
materially in the beginning from each other and
from the lists of the Puranas. In the first, Pravira is
made the son of Puru; his son is Manasyn, who has
three sons, Sakta, Sanhanana and Vagmin; and
there the line stops. Another son of Puru is
Raudragva, whose sons are Riceyu and the rest, as
in our text; making them the second in descent,
instead of the eleventh. In the second list,the son of

Puru is Janamejaya, whose successors are
Pracinvat, Samyati, Ahamyati, Sarvabhauma,
Jayatsena, Avacina, Ariha, Mahabhauma,

Ayutandyin, Akrodhana, Devatithi, Ariha, Riksa,
१ Matinara, who is therefore the fifteenth from Puru,
instead of the fourth as in the first account or the
twelfth as in the text.

2. Dhundu : Vayu. Sambhu : Agni, Sudhanvan :
Brahma.

3. Bahuvidha : Agni and Matsya.

4. Sampati : Agni.

5. Omitted : Vayu. Bahuvadin : Matsya.

6. Bhadrasva : Matsya.

7. Rajeyu : Vayu. Riceyu : Agni. They were the
sons of the Apsaras Ghrtaci : or of Misrakesi ;
Mahabharata. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varnsa,
have very unaccountably and in opposition to all
other authorities, transferred the whole of the
descendants of Anu of this family; substituting for
Anu the second name in our text, Kakseyu, (Bk. IV.

7 Ch. XVIL)

8. The Vayu names also ten daughters, Rudrd,
Sidra, Madra, Subhagd, Amalaja, Tala, Khala,
Gopajala, Tamrarasé and Ratnakoti; and adds that
they were married to Prabhakara, a Rsi of the race
of Atri. The Brahma Purana and Hari Vamsa have a
legend of the birth of Soma, the moon, from him
and one of these ten; who succeeded to the power
and prerogatives of Atri. The sons of the other
wives were less distinguished, but they formed
families eminent amongst holy Brahmanas, called
Svastyatreyas.
