318

THE VISNU-PURANAM

यस्तेऽनुस्मरणसमवेतं नामग्रहणं करिष्यति, तस्य सर्पविषभयं
न भविष्यतीति।। ९॥
अत्र श्लोक:।
नर्म्मदायै नम: प्रातर्नर्मदायै नमो निशि।
नमोऽस्तु नर्म्मदे तुभ्यं रक्ष मां विषसर्पत:।।
SHURA AAA वा A AUS PAA १०॥
न चापि कृतानुस्मरणभुजो विषमपि सुभुक्तमुपघाताय

भविप्यति॥श्श्।।
च Wad: सन्ततिविच्छेदो
भविष्यतीत्युसाफायावरदढु।।१२।।

Narmada aecordingly went to Purukutsa
and condueted him to the regions below the
earth, where, being filled with the might of the
deity, he destroyed the Gandharvas. He then
returned to his own palaee; and the snake-
gods, in acknowledgement of Narmada's
serviees, conferred upon her as a blessing, that
whosoever should think of her and invoke her
name, should never have any dread of the
venom of snakes. This is the invocation;
"Salutation be to Narmada in the morning;
salutation be to Narmada at night; salutation
be to you, O Narmada! Defend me from the
serpent's poison." Whoever repeats this day
and night, shall never be bitten by a snake in
the dark nor in entering a chamber; nor shall
be who ealls it to mind when he cats suffer my
injury from poison, though it be mixed with
his food. To Purukutsa also the snake-gods
announced that the series of his dcscendants
should never be eut off.

पुरुकुत्सो मर्मदायां त्रसदस्युमजीजनत्।

त्रसदस्युसुत: सम्भूत:), ततोऽनरण्य:) तं रावणो
दिग्विजये जघान। अनरण्यस्य पृषदश्व:, पृषदश्वस्य हर्ष्यश्च:

न

पुत्रोऽभवत्। ततश्च सुमना:), तस्यापि
त्रिधन्वनस्त्यय्यारुण:।॥ १३॥

तस्मात् सत्यव्रत:। सोऽसौ त्रिशङ्कु संज्ञामवाप),
चण्डालत्तामुपगतश्च द्वादशवार्षिक्यामनावृष्ट्यां
विश्वामित्रकलत्रापत्यपोषणार्थं चाण्डालप्रतिग्रहपरिहरणाय च
जाह्नवीतीरे न्यग्रोधे मृगमांसमनुदिनं बबन्ध।। १४॥
परितुष्टेन च विश्वामित्रेण सशरीर: स्वर्शमारोपित:।

Purukutsa had a son by Narmada named
Trasadasyu, whose son was Sambhiita,’ whose
son was Aranya, who was slain by Ravana in
his triumphant progress through the nations.
The son of Aranya was Prsadasva; his son was
Haryyasva; his son was Sumanas ® his son was
Tridhanvan; his son was Trayyaruna; and his
son was Satyavrata, who obtained the
appellation of Triganku and was degraded to
the condition of a Candala or outcast.’ During
a twelve years’ famine Triganku provided the
flesh of deer for the nourishment of the wife
and children of Visvamitra, suspending it upon
a spreading fig-tree on the borders of the
Ganges, that the might not subjeet them to the
indignity of receiving presents from an
outcast. On this aceount Visvamitra, being
highly pleased with him, elevated him in his
living body to heaven.*

त्रिशङ्कोर्हरिश्चन्द्र:) तस्मात् रोहिताश्व:, ततश्च हरित:,
हरिताच्चञ्चु:, चञ्चोर्विजय-सुदेवौ। रुरुको विजयात्, रुरुकस्य
च gm:, ततो agit योऽसौ हैहयतालजङ्घादिभि-
रवजितोऽन्तर्व्वत्या महिष्या we at प्रविवेश।। १५॥

तस्याश्च AIM गर्भस्तम्भनाय गरो दत्त:। तेनास्या गर्भ:
स सप्तवर्षाणि wat wa wet स च

बाहुर्वृद्धभावदौर्व्वश्रमसमीपे WATT १६॥
सा तस्य wat चितां कृत्वा तमारोप्यानुमरण-
घृक्तनिश्चयाशूत्। अथैनामतीतानागतवर्त्तमानकालवेदी
स्वस्मादाश्रमान्निर्यव्यायाब्रवीत्, अलमेतेना-
सद्प्रहेण `अखिलभूमण्डलपतिरतिवीर्य्यपराक्रमोऽनेक-
यज्ञकृदप्तल्पिक्षक्षयकर्तातवोदरेचक्रवर्तीतिष्ठति।मैंवमैंव
साहसाध्यवसायिनी भवती wag, इत्युक्ता च सा
तस्मादनुमरणनिर्बन्धाद् विवराम्।। १७॥

The son of Triganku was Harigcandra;’ his
son was Rohitasva;' his son was Harita;"' his
son was Cuncu,’? who had two sons named
Vijaya and Sudeva. Ruruka'*? was the son of
Vijaya and his own son was Vrka, whose son
was Bahu (or Bahuka). This prinee was
vanquished by the tribe of Haihayas and
Talajanghas'* and his country was overrun by
them; in eonsequenee of which he fled into the
