BOOK II, CHAP. 4

167

156. Also read Pasus, ‘brutes.’ If the term might
be altered to Palli. it would imply ‘village or
pastoral tribes '

157. Also Khasikas and Khasakas. The first of
these is probably most correct, being equivalent to
Khasas. barbarians named along with the Sakas and
Daradas by Manu, etc., traces of whom may be
sought amongst the barbarous tribcs on the north-
east of Bengal, the Kasiyas: or it has been thought
that they may be referred to the situation of
Kashgar. Two copies have, in place of this,
Tukhiras. and the same occurs in the Ramayana:
the Vayu has Tusharas. but the Méarkandeya.
Tukhara: these are probably the Tochari. Tachari.
or Thogari, a tribe of the Sakas, by whom Bactria
was taken from the Greeks, and from whom
Tocharestan derives the name it still bears.

158. Also Pahlavas and Pallavas. The form in the
text is the more usual.

159. The Ramayana has Gahvaras. The
mountains from Kabul to Bamian furnish infinitely
numerous instance of cavern habitations.

160. These two, according to the Vayu, are
amongst the northern nations: but they might be
thought to be religious fraternities, from the sages
Atri and Bharadvaja.

161. The latter member of the compound occurs
posikas. payikas. and yodhikas, cherishers.'
‘drinkers,’ or ‘fighters :’ the first term denotes the
female breast.

162. Also Dronakas. ‘people of vallies.'

163. Also Kajingas, Kalingas would be here out
of place.

164. These and the preceding are included by the
Vayu amongst the mountain tribes of the north.

165. Many names indeed might be added to the
catalogue from the lists referred to io the Vayu,
Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas, as well as
several capable of verification from the Ramayana,
and other passages of the Mahabharata. This is not
the place however to exhaust the subject, and it has
bcen prosecuted too far perhaps already. It is
evident that a very considerable proportion of the
names recorded can be verified, and that many of
them may be traced in the geographical notices of
India left by the historians of Alexander's
expedition. That more cannot be identified is owing
in a great measure to incomplete research; and a
more extensive examination of the authorities

would no doubt discover passages where
circumstances, as well as names, are given by
which the places would be recognised. It is evident,
however, that much embarrassment also arises from
the inaccuracy of manuscripts, which vary -widely
and irreconcilably, 1 have given instances from
four different copies of the text; one in my own
possession, three in the library of the East India
Company; all very excellent copies, but manifestly
erroneous in many respects in their nomenclature of
places. and particularly of those which are least
known. No assistance is to be had from any
commentary, as the subject is one of little interest
in native estimation.

2 ने ने
