BOOK IV, 4

सकलक्षत्रक्षयकारिणशेषहैहयकुलकेतुभूतञ्च
परशुराममपास्तवीर्य्य-बलावलेपं चकार।॥४३॥
पितृवचनाच्चागणितराज्याभिलाघो भ्रातृभार्य्यसमन्वितो वनं
विवेश।। ४४॥
विराध-खर-दूषणादीन् कबन्ध-वालिनौ च जघान। बद्धवा
> Fife व 1 कृत्वा ॥
क्यातक्ताङ्कत्मष्णालफ्लेर्व्यफ्या॰ 7 ।

Wat जनकराजतनयामयोध्यामानिन्ये।। ४५॥

The son of Khatvanga was Dirgabhau; his
son was Raghu; his son was Aja; his son was
Dasaratha'®. The god from whose navel the
lotus springs became fourfold, as the four sons
of Dasaratha, Rama, Laksmana, Bharata and
Satrughna, for the protection of the world.
Rama, while yet a boy, accompanied
Visvamitra, to protect his sacrifice and slew
Tadaka. He afterwards killed M@rica with his
resistless shafts; and Subahu and others fells
by his arms. He removed the guilt of Ahalya
by merely looking upon her. In the palace of
Janaka he broke with ease the mighty bow of
Maheésvara and received the hand of Sita, the
daughter of the king, self-born from the earth,
as the prize of his prowess. He humbled the
pride of Parasurama, who vaunted his
triumphs over the race of Haihaya and his
repeated slaughters of the Ksatriya tribe.
Obedient to the commands of his father and
cherishing no regret for the loss of
sovereignty, he entered the forest,
accompanied by his brother Laksmana and by
his wife where he killed in conflict Viradha,
Kharadisana and other Raksasas, the headless
giant Kabandha and Bali the monkey monarch.
Having built a bridge across the ocean and
destroyed the whole R4aksasas nation, he
recovered his bride Sita, whom their ten-
headed king Ravana had carried off and
returned to Ayodhya with her, after she had
been purified by the fiery ordeal from the soil
contracted by her captivity and had been
honoured by the assembled gods, who bore
witness to her virtue.'°

327

भरतोऽपि गन्धर्वविषयसाधनायोग्रगन्धर्वकोटीस्तिस्रो जघान
शत्रुघ्नेनाप्यमितबलपराक्रमो मधुपुत्रो लवणो नाम राक्षसेश्वरो
निहतो मथुरा च निवेशिता। इत्येवमाद्यतुलबलपराक्रम-
विक्रमणैरतिदुष्टनिरवर्हणैरशेषस्यास्य जगतो निष्पादित-
स्थितयो राम-लक्ष्मण-भरत-शत्रुघ्ना: पुनर्दिवमारूढा:। येऽपि
तेषु भगवदंशेष्वनुरागिण: कोशलनगरजनपदास्तेऽपि
तन्मनसस्तत्सलोकता-मवापु:॥४६॥

Bharata made himself master of the
country of the Gandharvas, after destroying
vast numbers of them; and Satrughna having
killed the Raksasas chief Lavana, the son of
Madhu, took possession of his capital
Mathura.

Having thus, by their unequalled valour
and might, rescued the whole world from the
dominion of malignant fiends, Rama, Laks
mana, Bharata and Satrughna reascended to
heaven and were followed by those of the
people of Kosala who were fervently devoted
to these incarnate portions of the supreme Vis
nu.

रामस्य Y कुश-लवौ yal, लक्ष्मणस्याइगद-चन्द्रकेतू,
तक्ष-पुष्करौ भरतस्य सुबाहु-शूरसेनौ च शत्रुघ्नस्य।।४७॥

Rama and his brothers had each two sons.
KuSa and Lava were the sons of Rama; those
of Laksmana were Angada and Candraketu;
the sons of Bharata were Taksa and Puskara;
and Subahu and Sirasena’’ were the sons of
Satrughna.

कुशस्यातिथि:३ अतिथेरपि निषध: पुत्रोऽभवत्।
निषधस्यापि नल:, तस्यापि नभा: awa: पुण्डरीक:),
तत्तनय: क्षेमधन्वा, तस्य च देवानीक:। तस्याप्यहीनगु:
(ततो रूप:) तदो रुरु:, TA च पारिपात्र:, पारिपात्राद्दल:,
दलाच्छल:, तस्याप्युक्थ: उक्थाद् वज्रनाभ:, तस्मात्
शङ्खनाभ:, ततो व्युत्थिताश्व:) wer विश्वसहो जज्ञे।
हिरण्यनाभस्ततो महायोगीश्वरजैमिनिशिष्य:। यतो
याज्ञवल्क्यो योगमवाप। हिरण्यनाभस्य Ya: पुष्य:) तस्माद्
ध्रुवसन्धि:, तत: सुदर्शन:, तस्मादग्निवर्ण:, ततश्च शीघ्र:),
ततोऽपि we: पुत्रोऽभूत! योऽसौ योगमास्थायाद्यापि
कलापग्राममाश्रितस्तिष्ठति। आगामियुगे

सूर्य्यवंशक्षत्रप्रवर्त्तयिता भविष्यतीति। प्रसुश्रुतस्तस्यात्मज:,
