100 THE VISNU-PURANAM
daughter of Virana;'' ten of whom he gave to aat शिल्पसहस्राणां त्रिदशानाञ्च वर्द्धकि:।
Dharma, thirteen to KaSyapa, and twentyseven सर्वॆषां कर्त्त +

, . ` ॥ भृषण्॥नाञ्च ष्टि!ल्पबत। atl ul
to Soma. four to Aristanemi. two to ॥ . १९०
Bahuputra, two to Angiras, and two to य सर्वेषां विमानानि देवतानां चकार ह।
Kréagva. I will tell you their names. Arundhati, मनुष्याश्चोपजीवन्ति यस्य शिल्पं महात्मन:॥ १२१॥

Sankalpa, Muhirtté, Sidhya, and Visva were
the ten wives of Dharma,'” and bore him the
following progeny. The sons of Visva were the
Visvadevas;'> and the Sadhyas. those of
Sadhya. The Maruts, or winds, were the
children of Marutvati; the Vasus, of Vasu. The
Bhanus (or suns) of Bhanu, and the deities
presiding over moments, of Muhirtta. Ghosa
was the son of Lamba (an are of the heavens);
Nagavittéa (the milky way), the daughter of
Yami (night). The divisions of the earth were
born of Arundhati; and Sankalpa (pious
purpose), the soul of all, was the son of
Sankalpa. The deities called Vasus, because,
preceded by fire, they abound in splendour and
might,'° are severally named Apa. Dhruva,
Soma, Dhava (fire), Anila (wind), Anala (fire),
Pratytisha (day-break), and Prabhdsa (light).
The four sons of Apa werc Vaitandya. Srama
(weariness), Sranta (fatigue), and Dhur
(burthen). Kala (time), the cherisher of the
world, was the son of Dhruva. The son of
Soma was Varchas (light), who was the father
of Varcasvi (radiance). Dhava had, by his wife
Manohara (loveliness), Dravina, Hutahavya-
vaha. Sigra, Prana, and Ramana. The two sons
of Anila (wind). by his wife Siva, were
Manohara (swift as thought) and Avijfiatagati
(untraceable motion). The son of Agni (fire),
Kumara, was born in a clump of Sara reeds:
his sons were Sakha, Visékha, Naigameya, and
Prishthaja. The offspring of the Krttikas was
named Kartikeya. The son of Pratyisha was
the Rsi named Devala, who had _ two
philosophic and intelligent sons.'®

बृहस्पतेस्तु भगिनी वरस्त्री ब्रह्मचारिणी।
योगसिद्धा जगत्क्वस्नमसक्ता विचरत्युत।। ११८॥
प्रभासस्य तु सा भार्या वसूनामष्टमस्य च।
विश्वकर्मा महाभागस्तस्यां जज्ञे प्रजापति:। ११९॥

अजैकपादहिर्ब्रध्नस्त्वष्टा रुद्रश्च बुद्धिमान्।
त्वष्टुश्चाप्यात्मज: Yat विश्वरूपो महायशा:।। १२ २॥
BT बहुरूपश्च त्र्यम्बकश्चापराजित:।

वृषाकपिथ्चि शम्भुश्च कपर्दी रैवतस्तथा।। १२३॥
भृगव्याधश्च शर्वश्च कपाली च महामुने।

एकादशैते प्रथिता रुद्रास्तिभुवनेश्वरा:।। १२४॥

The sister of Brhaspati, lovely and
virtuous, Yogasiddha, who pervades the whole
world without being devoted to it, was the
wife of Prabhasa, the eighth of the Vasus, and
bore to him the patriarch Visvakarma, the
author of a thousand arts, the mechanist of the
gods, the fabricator of all ornaments, the chicf
of artists, the constructor of the self-moving
chariots of the deities, and by whose skill men
obtain subsistence. Ajaikapid, Ahirvradhna.
and the wise Rudra Tvastri were born; and the
self-born son of Tvasta was also the celebrated
Visvartipa. There are eleven well-known
Rudras, lords of the three worlds, or Hara.
Bahurtipa, Tryambaka. Aparajita, Vrsakapi.
Sambhu. Kaparddi, Raivata. Mrgavyadha,
Sarva. anil Kapali;"” but there are a hundred

appellations of the immeasurable mighty
Rudras."*

अदितिर्दितिर्दनु: काला अरिष्टा सुरसा तथा।। १२५॥
सुरभिर्विनता चैव ताभ्रा क्रोधवशा इरा।

कडुर्मुनिश्च धर्मज्ञ तदपत्यानि मे शृणु।। १२६॥
पूर्वमन्वन्तरे श्रेष्ठा द्वादशासन् सुरोत्तमा:।

तुषिता नाम तेऽन्योन्यमूचुर्वैवस्वतेऽन्तरे॥ १२७॥
उपस्थितेऽतियशसश्चाक्षुधस्यान्तरे मनो:।
समवायीकृता: VS समागम्य परस्परम्॥ १२८॥
आगच्छत gt देवा अदितिं सम्प्रविश्य वै।

`भन्वन्तरे प्रसूयामस्तन्न: श्रेयो भविष्यति।। १२९॥
