268

THE VISNU-PURANAM

mouth, nor crumble a clod of clay; nor look
upon the chief planetary bodies when he is
unclean. Let him not express disgust at a
corpse, for the odour of a dead body is the
produce of the moon. Let a decent man ever
avoid by night the place where four roads
meet, the village tree, the grove adjacent to the
place where bodies are burnt and a loose
woman.

पूज्य्डैवध्वजज्योतिश्छायां नातिक्रमेद् बुध:।

नैक: शून्याटवीं गच्छेन्न च शून्यगृहे TAA १४॥

केशास्थिकण्टकामेध्यवह्निभस्मतुषांस्तथा।

स्नानार्द्रधरणीञ्चैव दूरत: परिवर्जयेत्।। १५॥

नानार्यानाश्रयेत् कांश्चिन्न जिह्मं रोचयेद् बुध:।

उपसर्पेत न व्यालं चिरं तिष्ठेन्न चोत्थित:॥ १६॥

Let him not pass across the shadow or a
venerable person, of an image, of a deity, of a
flag, of a heavenly luminary.’ Let him not
travel alone through a forest, nor sleep by
himself in an empty house.’ Let him keep
remote from hair, bones, thorns, filth,
remnants of offerings, ashes, chaff and earth’
wet with water in which another has bathed.
Let him not receive the protection of the
unworthy, nor attach himself to the dishonest.

अतीव जागरस्वप्ने तद्दत्स्नानासने बुध:।

न सेवेत तथा शय्यां व्यायामञ्च नरेश्वर।। १७॥
दंष्रिणं शृङ्गिणश्चैव प्राज्ञो दूरेण वर्जयेत्।
अवश्यायञ्च राजेन्द्र! पुरोवातातपौ तथा।। १८॥
न स्नायान्न स्वपेन्नग्नो न चैवोपस्पृशेद बुध:।
मुक्तकच्छश्च नाचामेद् देवाभ्यर्चाञ्च THAT १९॥
होमदेवार्चनाद्यासु क्रियास्वाचमने तथा।

नैकवस्त्र: wade द्विजवाचनिके In २०॥

Let him not approach a beast of prey; and
let him not tarry long when he has risen from
sleep. Let him not lie in bed when he is awake,
nor encounter fatigue when it is time to rest. A
prudent man will avoid, even at a distance,
animals with tusks and horns; and he will shun

exposure to frost, to wind and to sunshine. A
man must neither bathe, nor sleep, nor rinse

his mouth while he is naked:* he must not
wash his mouth or perform any sacred rite,
with his waistband unfastened: and be must
not offer oblations to fire, nor sacrifice to the
gods, nor wash his mouth, nor salute a
Brahmana, nor utter a prayer, with only one
garment on.

नासमञ्जसशीलैस्तु सहासीत कदाचन।

सद्वृत्तसन्निकर्षो fe क्षणार्द्धमपि शस्यते।। २१॥

fade नोत्तमैर्गच्छेन्नाधमैश्च wet बुध:।

विवाहश्च विवादश्च तुल्यशीलैर्नृपेष्यते।। २ २॥

areata कलिं Wet: शुष्कवैरञ्च वर्जयेत्।

अप्यल्पहानि: सोढव्या वैरेणार्थागमं त्यजेत्।। २३॥

Let him never associate with immoral
persons: half an instant is the limit for the
intercourse of the righteous with them. A wise
man will never engage in a dispute with either
his superiors or inferiors: controversy and
marriage are to be permitted only between
equals. Let not a prudent man enter into
contention: let him avoid unprofitable enmity.
A small loss may be endured; but he should
shun the wealth that is acquired by hostility.

स्नातो नाङ्गानि निर्म्मर्जेत् स्नानशाट्या न पाणिना।
न च निर्धूनयेत् केशान् नाचामेन्नैव चोत्थित:॥ २४॥
Wes नाक्रमेत् पादं न पूज्याभिमुखं नयेत्।
वीरासनं गुरोरग्रे त्यजेत विनयान्वित:।॥ २५॥
अपसव्यं न eda देवागारचतुष्पथान्।
`मङ्गल्यपूज्यांश्च sen विपरीतान्न दक्षिणान्।। २६॥
सोमाग्न्यर्काम्बुवायुनां पूज्यानाञ्च न सम्मुखम्।
कुर्यात् ष्ठीवनविण्मूत्रसमुत्सर्गञ्च पण्डित:॥२७॥
तिष्ठन्न भूत्रयेत् Faq पन्थानं नावमूत्रयेत्।
शलेष्मविण्मूत्ररक्तानि सर्वदैव न ATM २८॥
श्लेष्मसिहानकोत्सर्गो नान्नकाले प्रशस्यते।
बलिमङ्गलजप्यादौ न होमे न महाजने।। २९॥

"When a man has bathed, he must not wipe
his limbs with a towel nor with his hands, nor
shake his hair, nor rinse his mouth before he
has risen. Let him not (when sitting) put one
foot over another, not stretch forth his foot, in
