३३6

said, "Well done, my boy; verily you are
wise:" and hence his name was Budha.”

स च आख्यातमेवैतत्- यथेलायामात्मजं पुरूरवस-
मुत्पादयामास।

पुरूरवास्त्वतिदानशीलोऽतियज्वातितेजस्वी। यं
सत्यवादिनमतिरूप-स्ववन्तं मित्रावरुणशापन्मानुषे लोके WaT
वस्तव्यम् sft कृतमतिरुर्वशी ददर्श।। २०॥

दृष्टमात्रे च यस्मिन् अपहाय मानमशेषमपास्य
स्वर्गसुखाभिलाषं तन्मना भूत्वा तमेवोपतस्थे।। २१॥
सोऽपि च तामतिशयितसकललोकस्त्रीकान्तिसौकुमार्य-
लावण्यातिविलास-हासादिगणामवलोक्य
तदायत्तचित्तवृत्तिर्बभूव।। २ २॥

उभयमपि तन्मनस्कमनन्यदृष्टि परित्यक्तसमस्ता-
न्यप्रयोजनमभूत्।। २३॥

राजा तु प्रागल्भ्यात् तामाह।। २४॥

By त्वामहमभिकामोऽस्मि प्रसीदानुरागमुद्दह इत्युक्ता
लज्जावखण्डितमर्वशी wren २५॥

भवत्वेवं यदि मे समयपरिपालनं भवान् करोतीति।। २६॥
आख्याहि मे समयमित्यथ पृष्टा पुनरब्रवीत्॥ २७॥
शयनसमीपे ममोरणकद्वयं पुत्रभूतं नापनेयम्।। २८॥
भवांश्च मया A न द्रष्टव्य:) घृतमात्रश्च ममाहार:।
इत्येवमेवेति भूपतिराह। war a सहावनीपतिरलकायां
चैत्ररथादिवनेषु अमलपद्मषण्डेषु अभिरमणीयेषु
मानसादिसर:सु अभिरममाण एव षष्टिवर्षसहस्राणि
अनुदिनप्रवर्द्धमानप्रमोदोऽनयत्। उर्वशी च तदुपभोगात्
प्रतिदिनप्रवर्द्धमानानुरागा अमरलोकवासेऽपि न wet चकार।
विना चोर्वश्या सुरलोकऽप्सरसां fag गन्धर्वाणाञ्च
नातिरमणीयोऽभवत्।। २९॥

It has already been related how Budha
begot Purfravas by Ila. Purtiravas’ was a
prince renowned for liberality, devotion,
magnificence and- love of truth and for
personal beauty. Urvasi having incurred the
imprecation of Mitra and Varuna, determined
to take up her abode in the world of mortals;
and descending accordingly, beheld Purtravas.
As soon as she Saw him she forgot all reserve
and. disregarding the delights of Svarga,
became deeply enamoured of the prince.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Beholding her infinitely superior to all other
females in grace, elegance symmetry, delicacy
and beauty, Purtravas was equally fascinated
by Urvasi; both were inspired by similar
sentiments and mutually feeling that each was
everything to the other, thought no more of
any other object. Confiding in his merits,
Purdravas addressed the nymph and said, "Fair
creature, I love you; have compassion on me
and return my affection." Urvasi, half averting
her face through modesty, replied, "I will do
so if you will observe the conditions I have to
propose." "What are they?" inquired the
prince; "declare them;" "I have two rams,”
said the nymph, "which I love as children;
they must be kept near my bedside and never
suffered to be carried away; you must also
take care never to be seen by me undressed;
and clarified butter alone must be my food."
To these terms the king readily gave assent.

समवेतो निशि शयनाभ्यासदेकमुरणकं जहार॥ ३०॥
तस्य चाकाशे नीयमानस्योर्व्वशी शब्दमशृणोत्आह च,
wert: पुत्र केनाप्ययमपह्रियते, कं
शरणमुपयामीत्याकर्ण्य राजा, `नग्नं मां देवी द्रक्ष्यती` fit न
qa अथान्यमप्युरणकमादाय गनर्वा चयु:।
तस्याप्यपह्रियमाणस्य शब्दमाकर्ण्य आकाशे पुनरपि
`अनाथास्म्यहमभर्त्तका कुपुरुषाश्रयेति` आर्त्तराविणी बभूव।
राजाप्यमर्षवशादन्धकारमेतदिति खड्गमादाय ge! ge!
हतोऽसीति व्याहरन्नभ्यधावत्। wer गन्धर्वैरतीवोज्ज्वला
विद्युज्जनिता। aq प्रभया चोर्व्वशी राजानमपगताम्बरं दूष्टा
अपव्रृत्तसमया तत्क्षणादेवापक्रान्ता।। ३ १॥

After this, Purtravas and Urvasi dwelt
together in Alaka, sporting amidst the groves
and lotus-crowned lakes of Caitraratha and the
other forests there situated, for sixty-one
thousand years.’ The love of Puriiravas for his
bride increased every day of its duration; and
the affection of Urvasi augmenting equally in
fervour, she never called to recollection
residence amongst the immortals. Not so with
the attendant spirits at the court of Indra; and
