BOOK V, CHAP. 1]

443

ceremony being completed, the cowherds
returned to their station.

NOTES

1. A set of very poor quibbles upon the terms of
the Pranayama : or, Purana, drawing in the breath
through one nostril; literally, ‘filling ; Kumbhaka,
closing the nostrils and suppressing the breath;
keeping it stationary or confined, as it were in a
Kumbha or water-pot : and Recaka, opening the
othcr nostril and emitting the breath; literally,
‘purging’ or ‘depletion.” The waters of the
reservoirs replenished in the beginning of the
autumnal season by the previous rains, remain for a
while full, until they are drawn off for irrigation or
reduced by evaporation : thus representing the three
operations of Purana, Kumbhaka and Recaka.

2. No public worship is offered to Indra at
present; and the only festival in the Hindu calendar,
the Sakradhvajotthana, the erection of a flag in
honour of Sakra or Indra, should be held on the
twelfth or thirteenth of Bhadra, which is in the very
middle of the rainy season; according to the 7ithi
Tatva, following the authority of the Kaélika and
Bhavisyottara Puranas. The Sakradhvajotthana is
also a rite to be performed by kings and princes. It
may be doubted, therefore, if the text intends any
particular or appointed celebration.

3. Or, Anviksiki (आन्वीक्षिकी), the science of
inquiring by reasoning, Tarka (a) or logic ; Trayi
(aA), the three Vedas collectively or the doctrines
they teach : Vartta (ara), rendered ‘practical,’ is the
knowledge of the means of acquiring subsistence
(aft:) : the fourth is Dandaniti (दण्डनीति:), the
science of government, both domestic and foreign.

4. These nomadic habits are entirely lost sight of
in the parallel passages of those Puranas in which
thc juvenile life of Krsna is narrated. The text of the
Hari Vaméa is in most of the other verses preciscly
the same as that of the Visnu Purana, putting
however into the mouth of Krsna a long additional
eulogium on the season of autumn.

5. The Hari Varnga says, ‘an illusory Krsna,
having become the mountain, ate the flesh that was
offered;’ मांसंचमायकृष्णो। गिरिर्भूत्वा Wad! Of course the
‘personified’ mountain is intended, as appears from
several of the ensuing passages; as for instance, he
says presently. ‘I am satisfied; and then in his

divine form he smiled,’ संतृप्ततोस्मीतिदिव्तेन रूपेण प्रजहास

वै। The Hari Varnga affords here, as in so many
other places, proofs of its Dakhini origin. It is very
copious upon the homage paid to the cattle and
their decoration with garlands and plumes of
peacocks’ feathers, of which our text takes no
notices. But in the south of India there is a very
popular festival, that of the Punjab, scarcely known
in the north, when cattle are decorated and
worshipped; a celebration which has no doubt
suggested to the compiler of the Hari Varga the
details which he describes.
३९४० ४९
