३90

THE VISNU-PURANAM

will be Amitrajit;!° his son will be Vrhadraja;°
his son will be Dharman;'’ his son will
Krtafijaya, his son will be Ranafijaya; his son
will be Sanjaya; his son will be Sakya;’* his
son will be Suddhodana,’® his son will be
Ratula,”’ his son will be Prasenajit, his son
will be Ksudraka, his son will be Kundaka;”!
his son will be Suratha;?* his son will be
Sumitra. These are the kings of the family of
Ikshwaku, descended from Vrihadbala. This
commemorative verse is current concerning
them; “The race of the descendants of
Ikshwaku will terminate with Sumitra: it will
end in the Kali age with him.””

NOTES

1. See Bk. IV. Ch. II.

2. Vrhadratha : Vayu.

3. Vrhatksaya : Vayu. Vrhadrana :
Omitted : Matsya.

4. Omitted : Vayu. Uruksaya : Matsya. Urukriya
: Bhagavata.

5. Omitted by all three.

6. Vatsavrddha : Bhagavata.

7. Prativytha : Vayu.

8. The Bhagavata inserts Bhanu. The Matsya
says that Ayodhya was the capital of Divakara. The
Vayu omits the next twelve names; probably a
defect in the copies.

9. Druvasva : Matsya.

10. Bhadnumat : Bhagavata, Bhavyaratha or
Bhavya : Matsya.

11. Pratikasva : Bhagavata. Pratipasva : Matsya.

12. The Bhagavata and Matsya prefix a
Supratipa or Supratika.

13. Puskara : Bhagavata.

14. Suparvan or Sumantra : Matsya. Sutapas :
Bhagavata.

15. Amantravit : Matsya.

16. Vrhadbraja : Bhagavata.

17. Omitted : Matsya Varhis : Bhagavata.

18. The Bhagavata and Vayu have Sakya. My
copy of the Matsy has Sadhya, but the Radcliffe
MS., more correctly, no doubt. Sakya (शक्य:),

19. In some copies Krodhodana; but it is also
Suddhodana, Matsya and Vayu; Suddhoda,
Bhagavata.

Bhagavata.

20. Rahula : Vayu. Siddhartha or Puskala :
Matsya Langala : Bhagavata. This and the two
preceding names are of considerable chronological
interest; for Sakya is the name of the author or
reviver of Buddhism, whose birth appears to have
occurred in the seventh and death in the sixth
century before Christ (B.C. 621-543). There can be
no doubt of the individual here intended, although
he is out of his place, for he was the son, not the
father, of Suddhodana and the father of Rahula; as
he is termed in the Amara and Haima Kogsas,
Saudhodani or Suddhodana suta the son of
Suddhodana and R4hulasu the parent of Rahula ; so
also in the Mahavarhéa, Siddhartha or Sakya is the
son of Suddhodano and father of Rahula. Turnour's
translation, p. 9. Whether they are rightly included
amongst the princes of the race of Iksvaku is more
questionable, for Suddhodana is usually described
as a petty prince, whose capital was not Ayodhya,
but Kapilavastu. At the same time it appears that
the provinces of the Doab had passed into the
possession of princes of the lunar line and the
children of the sun may have been reduced to the
country north of the Ganges or the modem
Gorakhpur, in which Kapila was situated. The
Buddhists do usually consider their teacher Sakya
to be descended from Iksvaku. The chronology is
less easily adjusted, but it is not altogether
incompatible. According to the lists of the text,
Sakya, as the twenty-second of the line of Iksvaku,
is contemporary with Ripufijaya, the twenty-second
and last of the kings of Magadha, of the family of
Jarasandha; but, agreeably to the Buddhist
authorities, he was the friend of Bimbasara, a king
who in the Pauranik list appears to be the fifth of
the Saigunaga dynasty and tenth from Ripuiijaya.
The same number of princes does not necessarily
imply equal duration of dynasty and Iksvaku's
descendants may have out-lasted those of
Jaraésandha; or as is more likely for the dynasty was
obscure and is evidently imperfectly preserved -
several descents may have been omitted, the
insertion of which would reconcile the Pauranik
lists with those of the Buddhists and bring Sakya
down to the age of Bimbas4ra. It is evident, from
what occurs in other authorities, that the Aiks
vakava princes are regarded as contemporaries
even of the Saigunaga dynasty : see c. 24, n. 17.
