BOOK I, CHAP. 9

रूपौदार्य्यगुणोपेतस्ततश्चाप्सरसां गण:।

क्षीरोदधे: समुत्पन्नो मैत्रेय परमाद्भुत:।॥ SG

Next from the whirlpool of the deep,
sprang the celescial Parijata tree, the delight of
the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world
with its blossoms. The troop of Apsarasas. the
nymphs of heaven, were then produced, of
surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty
and with taste.

तत: शीतांशुरभवज्जगृहे त्वं महेश्वर:।
जगृहुश्च विषं नागा: क्षीरोदाच्च समुत्थितम्।। ९६॥
ततो धन्वन्तरिर्देव: PATE: खयम्।
विभ्रत् कमण्डलुं पूर्णममृतस्य समुत्थित:॥ ९७॥
तत: स्वस्थमनस्कास्ते सर्वे दैतेय-दानवा:।
बभूवुर्मुदिता: wa मैत्रेय मुनिभि: सह।। ९८॥

The cool-rayed moon next rose, and was
seized by Mahadeva: and then poison was
engendered from the sea, of which the snake
gods (Nagas) took possession. Dhanvantari,
robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup
of Amrta, next came forth: beholding which,
the sons of Diti and of Danu, as well as the
Munis. were filled with satisfaction and
delight.

तत: स्फुरत्कान्तिमती विकासिकमले स्थिता।
MEA पयसस्तस्मादुत्थिता भृतपङ्कजा। ९९॥

तां तुष्टुवुर्मुदा युक्ता: श्रीसूक्तेन महर्षय:।
विश्वावसुमुखास्तस्या गन्धर्वा: पुरतो जगु:॥ १००॥
घृताचीप्रमुखा ब्रह्मन् ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा:।

पङ्गाद्या: सरितस्तोयै: स्नानार्थमुपतस्थिरे।। १० VI
दिग्गजा हेमपात्रस्थमादाय ferret जलम्।
स्नापयाञ्चक्रिरे देवीं सर्वलोकमहेश्वरीम्।। १० २॥

Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and
holding a water-lily in her hand, the goddess
Sri, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves.
The great sages, enraptured, hymned her with
the song dedicated to her praise’. Vis vavasu
and other heavenly quiristers sang, and
Ghrtaci and other celestial nymphs danced

before her, Ganga and other holy streams
attended for her ablutions; and the elephants of

61

the skies, taking up their pure waters in vases
of gold, poured them over the goddess, the
queen of the universal world.

क्षीरोदो mug तस्यै मालामग्लानपङ्कजाम्।

ददौ विभूषणान्यङ्गे- विश्वकर्मा चकार च।। १०३॥

दिव्यामाल्याम्बरधरा स्नाता भूषणभूषिता।

पश्यतां सर्वदेवानां ययो वक्ष:स्थलं Bil १०४॥

तयावलोकिंता देवा हरिवक्ष:स्थलस्थया।

ween मैत्रेय agar परां निर्वृतिमागता।। १०५॥

Sant परमं जग्मुर्दैत्या विष्णुपराङ्मुखा:।

त्यक्ता PRAT महाभाग विप्रचित्तिपुरोगमा:।। १०६॥

The sea of milk in person presented her
with in wreath of never-fading flowers, and
the artist of tnc gods (Visvakarma) decorated
her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus
bathed. attired, and adorned, the goddess, in
the view of the celestials, cast herself upon the
breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her
eyes upon the deities, who were inspired with
rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas, who,
with Vipracitti at their head, were filled with
indignation, as Visnu turned away from them,
and they were abandoned by the goddess of
prosperity (Laksmi).

ततस्ते जगृहुर्दूत्या धन्वन्तरिकरे स्थितम्।

कमण्डलुं महावीर्या यत्रास्ते Te द्विजामृतम्।। १०७॥

मामया लोभयित्वा ary विष्णु: स्त्रीरूपमास्थित:।

दानवेभ्यस्तदप्ताय देवेभ्य: प्रददौ विभु:।। १० ८॥

उद्यतायघमिस्लिशा दैत्याप्ताश्च समभ्ययु:।। १० ९॥
पोतेऽमृते च बलिभिर्देवैर्दैत्यचमुस्तदा।

वध्यमाना दिशो भेजे पातालं तु विवेश वै।। ११०॥

al SAT मुदा युक्ता: शङ्खचक्रगदाभृतम्।

प्रणिपत्य यथापूर्वम् आशासत त्रिविष्टपम्॥ १११॥

The powerful and indignant Daityas then
forcibly seized the Amrta-cup. that was in the
hand of Dhanvantari; but Visnu. assumin‘. a
female form, fascinated and deluded them: and
recovering the Amrta from them, delivered it

to the gods. Sakra and the other deities quaffed
the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping
