BOOK V, CHAP. 33

कन्यान्त:पुरमध्ये तं रममाणं सहोषया।

विज्ञाय रक्षिणो गत्वा शशंसुर्दैत्यभूपते:।। ६॥
आदिष्टं किङ्कराणान्तु dt तेन दुरात्मना।
जघान परिघं लोहमादाय परवीरहा।। ७॥

हतेषु तेषु वाणोऽपि रथस्थस्तद्वधोद्यत:। `
युध्यमानो यथाशक्ति यदा eter निर्जित:।। ८॥।
मायया युयुधे तेन स तदा मन्रिचोदित:।

ततस्तं पन्नगास्त्रेण FHT यदुनन्दनम्।। ९॥

At that time the nymph Citralekha returned
from Dvaraka, and by the exercise of her
magic power brought Aniruddha along with
her. The guards of the inner apartments
discovering him there with UsA, reported it to
the king who immediately sent a body of his
followers to seize the prince; but the valiant
youth, taking up an iron club, slew his
assailants: on which Bana mounted his car,
advanced against him, and endeavoured to put
him to death. Finding however, that Aniruddha
was not to be subdued by prowess, he
followed the counsel of his minister, and
brought his magical faculties into the conflict,
by which he succeeded in capturing the Yadu
prince, and binding him in serpent bonds.

द्वारवत्यां क्व यातोऽसावनिरुद्धेति जल्पताम्।
यदूनामाचचक्षे तं Fag AUT नारद:।॥ १०॥
तं शोणितपुरे श्रुत्वा नीतं विद्याविदग्धया।

योषिता हत्ययं जग्मुर्यादवा नामरैरिति।। ११॥

When Aniruddha was missed from
Dvaravati, and Yadavas were inquiring of one
another whither he had gone, Narada came to
them, and told them that he was the prisoner of
Bana, having been conveyed by a female,
possessed of magic faculties, to Sonitapura.’
When they heared this, they were satisfied; for
they had imagined he had been taken away by
the gods (in reprisal for the Parijata tree).

Wal गरुडमारुह्य स्मृतमात्रागतं हरि:।

बल-प्रद्युम्न सहितो बाणस्य प्रययौ पुरम्।। १२॥
पुरीप्रवेशे प्रमथैर्युद्धमासीन्महात्मन:।

ययौ बाणपुराभ्यासं नीत्वा ary संक्षयं BAT १३॥

503

ततस्विपादस्तिशिरा ज्वरो माहेश्वरो महान्।
बाणसर्षार्थमत्यर्थं युयुधे शार्ङ्गधन्वना ॥ १४॥

Krsna therefore immediately summoned
Garuda, who came with a wish; and mounting
upon him, along with Bala and Pradyumna, he
set off for the city of Bana. On their approach
to the city they were opposed by the spirits
who attend on Rudra, but these were soon
destroyed by Hari, and he and his companions
reached the vicinity of the town. Here mighty
Fever, an emanation from Maheswara, having
three feet and three heads,’ fought desperately
with Visnu in defence of Bana.

तद्भस्मस्पर्शसम्भूतताप: कृष्णाङ्गसङ्गमात्।

अवाप बलदेवोऽपि श्रममामीलितेक्षण:॥ १५॥

तत: स युध्यमानस्तु सह देवेन शारङ्गिणा।

वैष्णवेन ज्वरेणाशु कृष्णदेहान्निराकृत:॥ १६॥

नारायणभुजाघातपरिपीड्नविह्वलम्।

तं वीक्ष्य क्षम्यतामस्येत्याहं देव: पितामह:॥ १७॥

ततश्च क्षान्तमेवेति प्रोक्त्य तं वैष्णवं ज्वरम्।

आत्मन्येव लयं निन्ये भगवान् मधुसूदन:। १८॥

मम त्वया समं युद्धे ये स्मरिष्यन्ति मानवा:।

विज्वरास्ते भविष्यन्तीत्युक्त्वा dt ययौ saz: ॥१९॥

Baladeva, upon whom his ashes were
scattered, was seized with burning heat, and
his eyelids trembled: but he obtained relief by
clinging to the body of Krsna. Contending thus
with the divine holder of the bow, the Fever
emanating from Siva was quickly expelled
from the person of Krsna by Fever which he
himself engendered. Brahma bcholding the
impersonated malady bewildered by the
beating inflicted by the arms of the deity,
entreated the latter to desist; and the foe of
Madhu refrained, and absorbed into himself
the fever he had created. The rival Fever then
departed, saying to Krsna, “Those men who
call to memory the combat between us shall be
ever exempt from febrile disease.”

ततोऽग्नीन् भगवान् पञ्च जित्वा-नित्वा तथा क्षयम्।
दानवानां बलं विष्णुश्चूर्णयामास लीलया।। २०॥
