46

THE VISNU-PURANAM

12. The twenty-four daughters of Daksa are
similarly named and disposed of in most of the
Puranas which notice them. The Bhagavata, having
introduced a third daughter of Svayambhuva, has a
rathcr different enumeration, in order to assign
some of them, the wives of the Prajapatis, to
Kardama and Devahiti. Daksa had therefore, it is
there said (b. IV. c. I), sixtcen daughters, thirteen of
whom were matried to Dharma. named Sraddha,
Maitri (friendship), Daya (clemency), Santi Tusti.
Pusti, Kriya, Unnati (elevation), Buddhi, Medha,
Titiksa (patience). Hri (modesty), Martti (form):
and three, Sati. Svaha, and Svadha, married, as in
our text. Some of the daughters of Devahiiti repeat
these appellations, but that is of slight
consideration. They are Kali (a moment), married
to Marichi: Anasiiya to Atri; Sraddha to Angiras;
Havirbhu (oblation-born) to Pulastya; Gati
(movement) to Pulaha : Kriya to Kratu; Khyati to
Bhrgu : Arundhati to Vasistha; and Santi to
Atharvan In all these instanccs the persons are
manifcstly allegorical, bcing personincations of
inteHigences and virtues and religious rites, and
being therefore appropriately wedded to the
probable authors of the Hindu code of religion and
morals, or to the equally allegorical representation
of that codc, Dharma, moral and religious duty.

13. The same remark applies here. The Puranas
that give these details generally concur with our
text, but the Bhagavata specifies the progeny of
Dharma in a somewhat differcnt manner; or,
following the ordcr obscrved in the list of Dharma's
wives, their children are, Rita (truth), Prasdda
(favour), Abhaya (fearlessness), Sukha, Muda
(pleasure), Smaya (wonder). Yoga (devotion),
Darpa, Artha (meaning), Smriti (memory),
Kshema, Prasraya (affection), and the two saints
Nara and Narayana, the sons of Dharma by Martti.
We have occasional varicties of nomenclature in
other authorities; as, instead of Sruta, Sama: Korma
Purana. instcad of Dandanaya, Samaya; and instead
of Bodha, Apramada; Linga Purana: and Siddha in
place of Sukha: Kirma Purana.

14. The text rather abruptly introduces Adharma
and his family. He is said by the commentator to be
the son of Brahma, and the Linga Purana
enumeratcs him among the Prajapatis, as well as
Dharma. According to the Bhagavata, he is the
husband of Mrsha (falsehood), and the father of

Dambha (hypoerisy) and Maya (deceit), who were
adopted by Nirritti. The scries of their descendants
is also somewhat varied from our text; being in
each descent, however, twins which intermarry, or
Lobha (covetousness) and Nikrti, who produce
Krodha (wrath) and Himsa: their children are, Kali
(wickedness) and Durukti (evil speech): their
progeny are, Mrtyu and Bhi (fear); whose offspring
are, Niraya (hell) and Yatana (torment).

15. The three first of these are more particularly
described in the last book: the last. the Nitya, or
constant, is differently described by Vans Kennedy
(Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p. 224. note). "In
the 7th chapter.” he obscrves, “of the Visnu Purina
four kinds of Pralaya are described. The Naimittika
takes place when Brahma slumbers: the Prakrtika
when this universe returns to its original nature:
Atyantika proceeds from divine knowledge: and
Nitya is the extinction of life. like the extinction of
a lamp. in sleep at night.” For this Tast
characteristic, however, our text furnishes no
warrant; nor can it be explained to signify, that the
Nitya Pralaya means no more than “a man's falling
into a sound sleep at night.” All the copies
consulted on the present occasion concur in
reading, fica: wea जातानां यो विनाशो दिवानिशं। as
rendered above. The commentator supplies the
illustration, दीपज्वालावत्। ‘like the flame of a lamp;’
but he also writes, जातानां दिवानिशं यो विनाश: स नित्य:।
‘That which is the destruction of all that are born,
night and day, is the Nitya, or constant’ Again, in a
verse presently following we have the Nitya Sarga,
‘constant or perpetual creation,’ as opposed to
constant dissolution भूतान्यनुदिनं wa जायन्ते मुनिसन्तमा:।
fea: सर्ग: स तु प्रोक्त: पुराणार्थविचक्षणै:। ‘That in which, oh
excellent sages, beings are daily born, is termed
constant creation, by those learned in the Puranas’.
The commentator explains this, अस्पदादिसृष्टिप्रवाहो नित्य:
सर्गं इत्यर्थ:। "The constant flow or succession of the
creation of ourselves and other creatures is the
Nitya or constant creation: this is the meaning of
the text." It is obvious, therefore, that the alternation
intended is that of life and death, not of waking and
sleep.

Ke
