BOOK I, CHAP. 2

il

quiescent. These are the three Avasthds (lit.
hypostases) of the self-born. Brahma is the quality
of activity : Rudra that of darkness; Visnu, the lord
of the world, is goodness: so. therefore, the three
gods are the three qualities They are ever combined
with. and dependent upon one another, and they are
never for an instant separate; they never quit each
other.’

यथा प्राग्व्यापक: क्षेत्री सर्गादिषु गुणैर्युत:।

aa a संज्ञामायाति ब्रह्माविष्णुशिवात्मिकां॥

ब्रह्मत्वे YHA लोकान् Seed संहरत्यपि।

विष्णुत्वेऽपि चोदासीनस्तिस्रोऽवस्था: स्वयम्भुव:।॥

रजो ब्रह्मा TH रुद्रो विष्णु: Ted जगत्पति: |

अत एव त्रयो Ca Wa WS त्रयो गुणा:॥

अन्योन्यमिथुना ह्येते अन्योन्याश्रयिणस्तथा।

क्षणं वियोगो नह्येषां त्यजन्ति परस्परं॥

The notion is one common to all antiquity,
although less philosophically conceived, or perhaps
less distinctly expressed, i the passages which
have come down to us. The tpets a'ptkas vtooT
aceis of Plato are said by Cudworth (1. 111), upon
the authority of Plotinus, to be an ancient doctrine,
maAaia dcea and he also observes, "Orpheus,
Pythagoras, and Plato have all of them asserted a
trinity of divine hypostases; and as they
unquestionably derived much of their doctrine from
the Egyptians, it may reasonably be suspected that
the Egyptians did the like before them." As
however the Grecian accounts, and those of the
Egyptians, are much more perplexed and
unsatisfactory than those of the Hindus, it is most
probable that we find amongst them the doctrine in
its most original as well as most methodical and
significant from.

2. This address to Visnu pursues the notion that
he. as the supreme being, is one. whilst he is all: he
is Avikara, not subject to change; Sadaikariipa, one
invariable nature: he is the liberator (tara), or he
who bears mortals across the ocean of existence: he
is both single and manifold (ekanekariipa): and he
is the indiscrete (avyakta) cause of the world, as
well as the discrete (vyakta) effect: or the invisible
cause, and visible creation.

3. Jaganmaya, made up. or consisting
substantially (44). of the world. Maya in an affix
denoting 'made' or consiting of,' as Kastha maya.,
made of wood.’ The world is therefore not regarded

by the Pauraniks as an emanation or an illusion, but
as consubstantial with its first cause.

4. Aniyansam anniyasam ‘the most atomic of the
atomic;' alluding to the atomic theory of the Nyaya
or logical school.

5. Or Acyuta; a common name of Visnu, from a,
privative, and chyuta. fallen; according to our
comment, 'he who does not perish with created
things.’ The Mahabharata interprets it in one place
to mean. ‘he who is not distinct from final
emancipation;'‘and in another to signify, ‘exempt
from decay, (क्षयहीन: ). A commentator on the Kasi-
knanda of the Skanda Purana explains it. -be who
never declines (or varies) from his own proper
nature;' स्वभावादप्रच्यवते।

6. This is another commen title of Visnu,
implying supreme, best (Uttama), spirit (Purusa), or
male. or sacrificc, or. according to the Mahabh.
Moksa Dharma, whatever sense Puruga may bear:

`पुरुषो यज्ञ इत्येवं यत् परं परिकीर्तितं।

यच्चान्यत् पुरुषाख्यं स्यात् सर्वं तत्पुरुषोत्तम:॥

7, Paramarthatas, ‘by or through the real object,
or sense; through actual truth,

8. Bhranti darSanatas ‘false appearances,’ in
opposition to actual truth.,By the nature of visible
objects, (अर्थस्वरूपेण) : Artha is explained by drisya
‘visible,; swartipena by ‘the nature of: that is, visible
objects are not what they seem to be. independent
existences; they are essentially one with their
original source: and knowledge of their true nature
or relation to Visnu, is knowledge of Visnu himself.
This is not the doctrine of Maya, or the influence of
illusion, which alone, according to Vedanta
idcalism, constitutes belief in the existence of
matter: a doctrine foreign to most of the Puranas
and first introduced amongst them apparently by
the Bhagavata.

9. A different and more detailed account of the
transmission of the Visnu Purana is given in the last
book. c. 8.

10. The ordinary derivation of Vasudeva has
been noticed above (p. J): here it is derived from
Vas, ‘to dwell,’ from Visnu's abiding in all things,
and all in him: समस्तं च वसत्यत्र। The
Mahabharata explains Vasu in the same manner,
and Deva to signify radiant, shining `

wed जगदात्मनि वासयति सर्व्वभूतेषु वसत्तीति वासु:।
सूर्य्य इव दीप्तिमा नितिदेव: वासुश्चासो देवश्चेति वासुदेव:॥
