BOOK II, CHAP. 13

209

भृगमेव deel त्यजन् प्राणानसावपि।
तन्मयत्वेन मैत्रेय! नान्यत् किञ्चिदचिन्तयत्।॥ ३ २५

In the course of time the king became
subject to its influence. He died, watched by
the deer, with tears in its eyes, like a son
mourning for his father; and he himself, as he
expired, cast his eyes upon the animal, and
thought of nothing else, being wholly occupied
with one idea.

ततश्च त्तत्कालकृतां भावनां प्राप्य तादृशीम्।
जम्बूमार्गे महारण्ये जातो जातिस्मरो मृग:।। ३३॥
जातिस्मरत्वादुद्दिग्न: संसारस्य द्विजोत्तम!

विहाय मातरं भूय: शालग्राममुपाययौ॥ ३४॥
शुष्कैस्तृणैस्तथा पर्णै: स कुर्वन्नात्मपोषणम्।
मृगत्वहेतुभूतस्य कर्मणो निष्कृतिं ययौ॥ ३५॥
aa चोत्सृष्टदेहोऽसौ BX जातिस्मरो द्विज:।

In consequence of this predominant feeling
at such a season, he was born again, in the
Jambumarga forest,’ as a deer, with the faculty
of recollecting his former life; which
recollection inspiring a distastc for the world,
he left his mother, and again repaired to the
holy place Salagrama. Subsisting there upon
dry grass and leaves, he atoned for the acts
which had led to his being born in such a
condition; and upon his death he was next
born as a Brahmana, still retaining the memory
of his prior existence.

सदाचारवतां Ys योगिनां wat Hern ३६॥
सर्वविज्ञानसम्पन्न: सर्वशास्त्रार्थतत्त्ववित्।
अपश्यत् स च मैत्रेय! आत्मानं WHA: TTT ३७॥
आत्मनोऽधिगतज्ञानो देवादीनि महामुने!
सर्वभूतान्यभेदेन स ददर्श महामति:॥ ३ ८॥
न पपाठ गुरुप्रोक्तं कृतोपनयन: श्रुतिम्।
न ददर्श च कर्माणि शास्त्राणि जगृहे न च।। ३९॥
उत्तोऽपि age: किञ्चिज्जडवाक्यमभाषत।
तदप्यसंस्कारगुणं ग्राम्यवाक्योक्तिसंश्रितम्।। ४०॥

He was born in a pious and eminent family

of ascctics, who werc rigid observers of
devotional rites. Possessed of all true wisdom,

and acquainted with the essence of all sacred
writings, he beheld soul as contradistinguished
from matter (Prakrti). Imbued with knowledge
of self, he beheld the gods and all other beings
as in reality the same. It did not happen to him
to undergo investiture with the Brahmanical
thread, nor to read the Vedas with a spiritual
preceptor, nor to perform ceremonies, nor to
study the scriptures. Whenever spoken to, he
replied incoherently and in ungramatical and
unpolished speech.

अपध्वस्तवपु: सोऽपि मलिनाम्बरधृग् द्विज:।
क्लिन्नदन्तान्तर: सर्वै: परिभूत: स नागरै:।।४१॥
सम्मानना परां हानिं योगर्द्ध: कुरुते यत:।
जनेनावमतो योगी योगसिद्धिश्च विन्दति।।४२॥
Tera वै योगी सतां मार्गमदूषयन्।

जना यथावमन्येरन् रच्छेयुर्नैव सङ्गतिम्।। ४३॥

His person was unclean, and he was clad in
dirty garments. Saliva dribbled from his
mouth, and he was treated with contempt by
all the people. Regard for the consideration of
the world is fatal to the success of devotion.
The ascetic who is despised of men attains the
end of the abstractions. Let therefore a holy
man pursue the path of the righteous, without
murmuring; and though men condemn him,
avoid association with mankind.

हिरण्यगर्भवचनं विचिन्त्येत्यं महामति:।
SAM दर्शयामास जडोन्मत्ताकृतिं जने।। ४४॥
ae यदाणोति सुबहु तदत्ते कालसंयमम्।।४५॥
पितर्युपरते सोऽथ भ्रातृ-भ्रातृव्य-बान्धवै:।
कारित: क्षेत्रकर्मादि कदन्नाहारपोषित:।।४६॥
स त्तुक्षपीनावयवो जडकारी च कर्मणि।
सर्वलोकोपकरणं बभूवाहारवेतन:॥४७॥

तं तादूशमसंस्कारं विप्राकृतिविचेष्टितम्।

क्षत्ता पृषतराजस्य काल्यै पशुमकल्पयत्।। ४८॥
Tat तं समलङ्कृत्य वैशसस्य विधानत:।
अधिष्ठितं महाकाली ज्ञात्वा योगेश्वरं तथा॥४९॥
तत: TF समादाय निशितं निशि सा तथा।
