BOOK IV, 2

315

from Saryati. The Brahma Purana says they took
refuge in secret places (gahana); for which the Hari
Varhsa substitutes (parvata gana) mountains. Thc
Vayu has neither and says merely that they were
renowned in all regions : विख्याता दिक्षु Weatg

2. So the Vayu, Linga, Agni, Brahma and Hari
Varhsa. The Matsya names three sons of Dhrsta,
Dhrstaketu, Citranitha and Ranadhrsta. The
Bhagavata adds, that the sons of Dhrsta obtained
Brahmanhood upon earth, though born Ksatriyas :
धृष्टाद्धार्टमभूत् क्षत्रं ब्रह्मभूयं गतं क्षितौ।

3. But who is Nabhaga ? for, as above observed,
e. I. n. 2, the son of the Manu is Nabhaga-nedista
and there is in that ease no such person as Nabhaga
: on the other hand, if Nabhaga and Nedista be
distinet names, we have ten sons of Vaivasvata, as
in the Bhagavata. The deseendants of Nedista,
through his son Nabhadga, have been already
specified; and aftcr all, therefore, we must consider
the text as intending a distinct person by the name
Nabhaga; and such a name does occur in the lists of
the Agni, Kiirma, Matsya and Bhagavata,
unquestionably distinet from that with whieh it is
also sometimes compounded. The Bhagavata
repeats the legend of the Aitareya Brahmana with
some additions and says that Nabhaga having
protracted his period of study beyond the usual age,
his brothers appropriated his share of the
patrimony. On his applying for his portion, they
consigned their father to him, by whose advice he
assisted the descendants of Angiras in a sacrifice
and they presented him with all the wealth that was
left at its termination. Rudra claimed it as his; and
Nabhaga aequiescing, the god confirmed the gift,
by which he became possessed of an equivalent for
the loss of territory. Most of the authorities
recognise but one name here, variously read either
Nabh4ga or Nabh4ga, the father of Ambarisa. The
Vayu, as well as the Bhagavata, concurs with the
text.

4, The Bhagavata considers Ambarisa as a king,
who reigned apparently on thc banks of the
Yamuna. He is more celebrated as a devout
worshipper of Visnu, whose discus protected him
from the wrath of Durvasas and humbled that
cholerie saint, who was a portion of Siva ; legend
whieh possibly reeords a struggle between two
seets, in which the votaries of Visnu, headed by
Ambarisa, triumphed.

5. The Agni, Brahma and Matsya stop with
Ambarisa. The Vayu and Bhagavata proceed as in
the text, only the latter adds to Virtipa, Ketumat and
Sambhu.

6. The same verse is cited in the Vayu and
affords an instance of a mixture of eharaeter, of
whieh several similar eases oceur subsequently. Ks
atriyas by birth, become Brahmanas by profession;
and such persons are usually eonsidered as
Angirasas, followers of deseendants of Angiras,
who may have founded a sehool of warrior-priests.
This is the obvious purpose of the legend of
Nabhaga's assisting the sons of Angiras to complete
their saerifice, referred to in a former note,
although the same authority has devised a different
explanation. Rathinara (or Rathitara, as read in
some eopies, as well as by the Bhagavata and
Vayu) being childless, Angiras begot on his wife
sons radiant with divine glory, who as the sons of
the monarch by his wife were Ksatriyas, but were
Brahmanas through their aetual father. . This
however is an after thought, not warranted by the
memorial verse eited in our text.

7. So the Bhagavata : क्षुवतस्तु मनोर्जज्ञे gearHutora:
सुत:।

8. The Matsya says that Indra (Devarat) was
born as Vikuksi and that Iksvaku had one hundred
and fourtcen others sons, who were kings of the
countries south of Meru; and as many who reigned
north of that mountain. The Vayu and most of the
other authoritics agree in the number of one
hundred, of whom fifty, with Sakuni at their head,
are placed in the north; and forty-eight in the south,
according to the Vayu, of whom Vimati was the
chief. The same authority specifies also Nimi and
Danda as sons of Iksvaku, as does the Bhagavata,
with the addition of their reigning in the central
regions. The distribution of the rest in that work is
twenty-five in the west, as many in the east and the
rest elsewhere; that is, the eommentator adds, north
and south. It seems very probably that by these
sons of Iksvaku we are to understand eolonies or
settlers in various parts of India.

9. See Bk. IIL. Ch. XIV.

10. The Vayu states that he was king of
Ayodhya, after the death of Iksvaku. The story
oeeurs in all the authorities, more or less in detail.

Il. The Vayu says it was in the war of the
starting and the stork; आडीवके Fel a confliet
