BOOK II, CHAP. 3

161

10. A central nation : Vayu. The Ramayana
places them in the east The combination indicates
the country between Benares and Oude.

11. Cedi is usually considered as Chandail, on
the west of the Jungle Mahals. towards Nagpur. It
is known, in times subsequent to the Puranas. as
Ranastambha.

12. Some copies read Vatsa and the other
Puranas have such a name amongst th« central
countries; the people perhaps of Vatsa Raja of
Kausambi, near the junction of the Yamuna and the
Ganga. There are, however, two Matsyas, one of
which, according to the Yantra Samrat, is
identifiable with Jaipur. In the Dig-vijaya of Nakula
he subdues the Matsays farther to the west or in
Gujrat.

13. Situated on the back of the Vindhy a range:
Vayu and Matsya. They are generally named with
the people of Malava, which confirms this locality.
They are said to be the posterity of Karusa, one of
the sons of VaivSvata Manu.

14. These are also placed along the Vindhya
chain, but at different times appear to have
occupied different positions. They were a kindred
tribe with the Andhakas and Vrsnis and a branch of
the Yadavas. A Bhoja Raja is amongst the warriors
of the Mahabharata. At a later period, Bhoja, the
Raja of Dhar, preserves an indication of this
people: and from him the Bhojpuris, a tribe still
living in western Bihar, profess to be descended:
they are not improbable relics of the older tribe.
Bhoja is also used sometimes as a synonym of
Bhojakata, a city near the Narmada, founded by
Rukmi. brother-in-law of Krsna, and before that,
prince of Kundina or Kondavir.

15. Pulinda as applied to any wild or barbarous
tribe; those here named are some of the people of
the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas are met
with in many other positions, especially in the
mountains and forests across central India, the
haunts of the Bhils and Gonds. So Ptolemy places
the Pulindai along the banks of the Narmada to the
frontiers of Larice; the Lata or Lar of the Hindus;
Kandesh and part of Gujarat.

16. In the other three Puranas we have
Uttamarnas. on the Vindhya range.

17. The people of the ‘ten forts,’ subsequently
multiplied to ‘thirty-six,’ such being the import of

Chattisgarh, which seemis to be in the site of
Dasgarna. - Megha Dita, p. 30, note.

18. A Vindhya tribe, according to the other
puranas. The locality is confirmed by mythological
personations; for Mekala is said to be a Rsi, the
father of the river Narmada; thence called Mekala
and Mekalakanya: the mountain where it rises is
also called Mekaladri. The Ramayana places the
Mekalas amongst the southern tribes.

19. Utakala is still the native name of Orissa.

20. These may be the southern Paficdlas. When
Drona overcame Drupada, king of Paficdla, as
related in the Mahabharata, Adi-parva, he retained
half the country, that north of the Ganga, and
restored to its former chief the other half, south of
that river as for as to the Chambal. The capital of
the latter became Makandi on the Gariga; and the
country included also Kampilya, the Kampil of the
Mohammedans, but placed by them in the Doab.
The capital of the northern portion was Ahiksetra,
name traceable in the Adisathrus of Ptolemy,
though the position differs; but Ahiksetra or
Ahichchatra, as it is also written, seems to have
been applied to more than one city.

21. Perhaps the people of Tirhut, along the Kosi.

22. ‘Having more than one back :` probable some
nickname or term of derision. Thus we have, in the
Ramayana and other works, enumerated amongst
tribes, the Karna-pravaranas. ‘those who wrap
themselves up in their ears;' Asta-karnakas, "the
eight-eared;" or Ostha-karnakas, “‘having lips
extending to their ears;" Kakamukhas, "crow-
faced"; Eka- padukas.- ‘one-footed,' or rather 'one-
slippered :' exaggerations of national ugliness, or
allusions to peculiar customs, which were not
literally intended, although they may have
furnished the Mandevilles. of ancient and modern
times with some of their monsters. The spirit of the
nomenclature is shown by these tribes being
associated with Kiratas, ‘barbarians.’ and Yavanas,
either Greeks or Mohammedans.

23. A preferable reading seems to be
Yugandhara : a cily in the Punjab so called is
mentioned in the Mahabharata, Karna Parva.

24. Read Bodhas, Godhas. and Saudhas. There is
a Rajput tribe called Sodha.

25. This may consist of two names, and is so
read in MSS. or the latter term occurs Kalingas;
both terms are repeated. Besides the Madra of the
