134

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and of planes, of sacrifices and of penance.
Vaisravana was made lung over kings; and
Varuna, over the waters. Visnu was the chief
of the Adityas; Pavaka. of the Vasus; Daksa,
of the patriarchs; Vasava of the winds. To
Prahlada was assigned dominion over the
Daityas and Danavas; and Yama, the king of
Justice, was appointed the monarch of the
Manes (Pitrs). Aitavata was made tlie king of
elephants; Garuda of birds; Indra, of the gods.
Ucchaisravas was the chief of horses; Vrsabha.
of kine. Sesha became the snake-king; the
lion, the monarch of the beascs; and the
sovereign of the trees was the holy fig-trcc.

एवं विभज्य राज्यानि दिशां पालाननन्तरम्।

प्रजापतिपतिर्ब्रह्मा स्थापयामास सर्वत:।८॥

पूर्वस्यां दिशि राजानं वैराजस्य WATT:

fam: wei सुधन्वानं सुतं वै सोऽभ्यषेचयत्॥ ९॥

दक्षिणस्यां दिशि तथा कर्ददमस्य प्रजापते:।

पुत्रं शङ्खपदं नाम Tart सोऽभ्यषेचयत्॥ १०॥

`पश्चिमस्यां दिशि तथा रजस: पुत्रमच्युतम्।

केतुमन्तं महात्मानं राजानमभिषिक्तवान्।। ११॥

तथा हिरण्यरोमाणं पर्ज्जन्यस्य प्रजापते:।

उदीच्यां दिशि दुर्द्धर्षं राजानमभ्यषेचयत्॥ १२॥

तैरियं पृथिवी wat सप्तद्वीपा सपत्तना।

यथाप्रदेशमद्यापि धर्मत: परिपाल्यते॥। १३॥

Having thus fixed the limits of each
auehority, the great progenitor Brahma
stationed rulers for the protcction of the
different quarters of the world: he made
Sudhanvan, the son of the patriarch Virdja. the
regent of the east; Sankhapada, the son or the
patriarch Kardama, of the south; the unmoctal
Ketumat, the son of Rajas, regent of the west,
and Hiranyaroman, the son of the patriarch
Parjanya, regent of the north.’ By these the
whole earth, with its seven continents and its
cities, is to the present day vigilantly
protected, according to their several limits.

Wa Ba प्रवृत्तस्य स्थितौ विष्णोर्महात्मन:।
विभूतिभूता राजानो ये चान्ये मुनिसत्तम।। १४॥

ये भविष्यति ये भूता: aa भूतेश्वरा द्विज।

ते सर्वे सर्वभूतस्य विष्णोरंशा द्विजोत्तम।। १५॥

ये तु देवाधिपतयो ये च दैत्याधिपास्तथा।
दानवानाञ्च ये नाथा ये नाथा: पिशिताशिनाम्।॥। १६॥
पशूनां ये च पतय: पतयो ये च पक्षिणाम्।
मनुष्याणाञ्च सर्पाणां नागानाञ्जाधिपाश्च ये।। १७॥
वृक्षाणां पर्वतानाञ्च ये भविष्यन्ति येऽधिपा:।

अतीता वर्त्तमानाश्च ये भविष्यन्ति चापरे।। १८॥

ते सर्वे सर्वभूतस्य विष्णोरंशसमुद्भवा:।

न fe पालनसामर्थ्यमृते सर्वेश्चरं हरिम्॥ १९॥

स्थितौ स्थिरं महाप्राज्ञ भवत्यन्यस्य कस्यचित्॥ २०॥
सृजत्येषु जगत्सृष्टौ स्थितौ पाति सनातन:।

हन्ति चैवान्तकत्वे च रज:सत्त्वादिसंश्रय:॥ २ १॥
चतुर्विभाग: संसृष्टौ चतुर्धा संस्थित: स्थितौ।
WAITS करोत्यन्ते चतुर्भेदो जनार्दन:॥ २ २॥
एकेनांशेन ब्रह्मासौ भवत्यव्यक्तमूर्तिमान्।
मरीचिमिश्रा: पतय: प्रजानामन्यभागत:।॥ २३॥
कालस्तृतीयस्तस्यांश: सर्वभूतानि चापर:।

sat चतुर्धा संसृष्टौ वर्त्ततेऽसौ रजोगुण:॥ २४॥

All these monarchs, and whatever others
may be invested with authority by the mighty
Visnu, as instruments for the preservation of
the world; all the kings who have been, and all
who shall be; are all, most worthy Brahman,
but portions of the universal Visnu. The rulers
of the gods, the rulers of the Daityas, the rulers
of the Danavas, and the rulers of all malignant
spirits; the chief amongst beasts, amongst
birds, amongst men, amongst serpents; the
best of trees, of mountains, of planets; either
those that now are, or that shall hereafter be,
the most exalted of their kind; are but protions
of the universal Visnu. The power of
protecting created things, the preservation of
the world, resides with no other than Hari, the
lord of all. He is the creator, who creates the
world; he, the eternal, preserves it in its
existence; and he, the destroyer, destroys it;

invested severally with the attributes of
foulness, goodness, and gloom. By a fourfold
