362

THE VISNU-PURANAM

When Satrajit reflected that he had been the
cause of the aspersions upon Krsna's character,
he felt alarmed and to conciliate the prince he
gave him to wife his daughter Satyabhama.

another and how he had carried off the jewel;
and she implored him to take prompt measures
to avenge such heinous wrong. Krsna, who is
ever internally placid, being informed of these
transactions, said to Satyabhama, as his eyes
flashed with indignation. "These are indeed
audacious injuries, but I will not submit to
them from so vile a wretch. They must assail

शतधन्वानमूचु: अयमतिदुरात्मा सत्राजितो योऽस्माभिर्भवता the tree, who would kill the birds that there
चाभ्यथितोऽप्यात्मजामस्मान् . भवन्तं चाविगणय्य कृष्णाय have built their nests. Dismiss excessive
दत्तवान्, तदलमनेन जीवता। घातयित्वैनं तन्महारत्नं war SOrrow; it needs not your lamentations to

fa न Yad? वयमप्यभ्युपपत्स्याम: यद्यच्युतस्तवापि
वैरानुबन्धं करिष्यतीति।। ३५॥

The maiden had been previously sought in
marriage by several of the most distinguished
Yadavas, as  Akrira, Krtavarman and
Satadhanvan, who were highly incensed at her
being wedded to another and leagued in
enmity against Satrajit. The chief amongst
them, with Akrira and Krtavarman, said to
Satadhanvan, "This caitiff Satrajit has offered
a gross insult to you, as well as to us who
solicited his daughter, by giving her to Krsna :
let him not live : why do you not kill him and
take the jewel? Should Acyuta therefore enter
into feud with you, we will take your part."

`एवमुक्तस्तथेत्यसावप्याह। जतुगृहदग्धानाञ्च पाण्डुनन्दनानां
दुर्योधनप्रयत्नशैथिल्यार्थ

कुल्यकरणाय वारणावतं गत:॥ ३ ६॥

Upon this promise Satadhanvan undertook
to slay Satrajit. When news arrived that the
sons of Pandu had been burned in the house of
wax'’, Krsna who knew the real truth, set off
for Varanavata to allay the animosity of
Duryodhana and to perform the duties his
relationship required. Satadhanvan taking
advantage of his absence, killed Satrajit in his
sleep and took possession of the gem. Upon
this coming to the knowledge of Satyabhamé,
she immediately mounted her chariot and
filled with fury at her father's murder, repaired

excite any wrath." Returning forthwith to
Dvaraka, Krsna took Baladeva apart and said
to him, "A lion slew Prasena, hunting in the
forests; and now Satrajit has been murdered by
Satadhanvan. As both these are removed, the
jewel which belonged to them is our common
right. Up then, ascend your car and put
Satadhanvan to death.”

गते च afer gata wait wera जघान),
मणिरत्नञ्चाददे। पितृवधामर्षपूर्णा स सत्यभामा शीघ्रं
अक्षान्तिमता शतधन्वना अस्मत्पिता व्यापादित:, तच्च
स्यमन्तकमणिरत्नमपहतम्। तदियमस्यावहासना। तदालोच्च
यदत्र युक्तं तत् क्रियतामिति कृष्णमाह।। ३७॥

तया dae: परितुष्टान्त:करणोऽपि दकृष्ण:
सत्यभामाममर्षताम्रलोचन: प्राह,--सत्ये। ममैषावहासना,
नाहमेता त्तस्य दुरात्मन: सहिष्ये।। ३ ८॥

न ह्यनुल्लङ्घ्य वरपादपं aq कृतनीडाश्रयिणो विहङ्गा
AST ३९॥

तदलमत्यर्थममुनास्मतपुरत: शोकप्रेरितवाक्यपरिकरेण),
इत्युक्त्वा द्वारकामभ्येत्य बलदजेवमेकान्ते वासुदेव:
प्राह,-मृगयागतं प्रसेनमटव्यां मृगपतिर्जघान।
सत्राजितोऽप्यधुना शतधन्वना निधनं प्रापित:।
तदुभयविनाशात् तन्मणिरत्नमावाभ्यां सामान्यं
भविष्यति।। x ont

तदुत्तिष्ठ, आरुह्यतां रथ:, शतधनुर्निधनायोद्यमं कुरु,
इत्यभिहितस्तथेति समन्वीप्सितव न। कृतोद्योगौ च

to Barandvata and told her husband how तावुभावुपलभ्य शतधन्वा कृतवर्माणमुपेत्य arfatyea-
Satrajit had been killed by Satadhanvan in कर्मनिमित्तमचोदयत्। आह चैनं कृतवर्मा, नाहं बलभद्र-

resentment of her having been married to वासुदेवाभ्यां we विरोधायालम्, इत्युक्तश्चाक्रूरमचोदयत्।
