BOOK IIT, CHAP. 15

CHAPTER 15
पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:
(श्राद्धभोजि-विप्रलक्षणादिकथनम् योगिप्रशंसा च)
aid उवाच
ब्राह्मणान् भोजयेच्छाद्धे यद्गुणांस्तान्निबोध मे।
त्रिणाचिकेतस्तिमधुस्निसुपर्ण: षडङ्गवित्॥ en
वेदविच्छोत्रियो योगी तथा वै ज्येष्ठसामग:।
ऋत्विक स्वस्रेय-दौहित्र-जामात्र-स्वसुरास्तथा।। २॥
भातुलोऽथ तपोनिष्ठ: पञ्चाग्नद्यभिरतस्तथा।
शिष्या: सम्बन्धिनश्चैव मातापितृरतश्च य:॥३॥
एतान् नियोजयेच्छाद्धे पूर्वोक्ताद् प्रथमं नृप।
म्राह्मणाम् पितृपुष्ट्यर्थमनुकल्पेष्वनन्तरान्॥४॥

Aurva proceeded—"Hear next, oh prince,
what description of Brahmana should be fed at
ancestral ceremonies. He should be one
studied in various triplets of the Rk and Yajur
Vedas ;' one who is acquainted with the six
supplementary sciences of the Vedas;’ one
who understands the Vedas; one who practises
the duties they enjoin;? one who exercises
penance; a chanter of the principal Samaveda,'
an officiating priest, a sister's son, a daughter's
son, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, a maternal
uncle, an ascetic, a Brahmana who maintains
the five fires, a pupil, a kinsman; one who
reverences his parents. A man should first
employ the Brahmanas first specified in the
principal obsequial rite; and the others
(commencing with the ministering priest) in
the subsidiary ceremonies instituted to gratify
his ancestors.

rage कुनखी क्लीब: श्यावदन्तस्तथा द्विज:।
कन्यादूषयिता वह्निवेदोज्झ: सोमविक्रयी।। ५॥
अभिशस्तस्तथा स्तेन: पिशुनो ग्रामयाजक:।
भृतकाध्यापकस्तद्ददू भृतकाध्यापितश्च य:।। ६॥
परमूर्वापतिश्चैव मातापित्रोस्तथोज्झक:।
वृषलीसूतिपोष्टा च वृषलीपतिरेव anon

तथा देवलकम्चैव श्राद्धे नार्हन्ति केतनम्।। ८।।

279

"A false friend, a man with ugly nails or
black teeth, a ravisher, a Brahmana who
neglects the service of fire and sacred study, a
vendor of the Soma plant, a man accused of
any crime, a thief, a calumniator, a Brahmana
who conducts religious ceremonies for the
vulgar: one who instructs his servant in holy

- writ or is instructed in it by his servant; the

husband of a woman who has been formerly
betrothed to another; a man who is undutiful to
his parents; the protector of the husband of a
woman of the servile caste or the husband of a
woman of the servile caste; and a Brahmana
who ministers to idols—are not proper persons
to be invited to an ancestral offering.”

प्रथमेऽह्नि ga: शस्ताञ्छोत्रियादीन् निमन्त्रयेत्।
wate तथैवैषां नियोगान् पैत्र्यदैविकान्।। <u
Wa: क्रोधव्यवायादीनायासं तैर्दिजै: सह।

यजमानो न कुर्वीत दोषस्तत्र WEAN १०॥

On the first day let a judicious man invite
emincnt teachers of the Vedas and other
Braéhmanas; and according to their directions
determine what is to be dedicated to the gods
and what to the Pitrs. Associated with the
Brahmanas, let the institutor of an obsequial
rite abstain from anger and incontinence.

श्राद्धे नियुक्तो भुक्त्वा वा भोजयित्वा नियुज्य च।
व्यवायी teat wet मञ्जयत्यात्मन: FATT ११॥
तस्मात् प्रथममत्रोक्तं द्विजाग्र्याणां निमन्त्रणम्।
अनिमन्त्र्य द्विजान् गेहमागतान् भोजयेद् यतीन्।। १२॥
पादशौचादिना गेहमागतान् पूजयेद् द्विजान्।
एवित्रपाणिराचान्तानासनेषूपवेशयेत्।। १३॥

He who having eaten himself in a Sraddha
and fed Brahmanas and appointed them to
their sacred offices, is guilty of incontinence,
theréby sentences his progenitors to shameful
suffering. In the first place, the Brahmanas
before described are to be invited; but those
holy men who come to the house without an
invitation are also to be entertained. The
guests are to be reverendy received with water
for their feet and the like; and the entertainer,
holding holy grass in his hand, is to place
