BOOK VI, CHAP. 5 543

true wisdom, and detachment from human

objects, obtains final dissolution. The first to

the three pains, or Adhyatmika, is of two

kinds, bodily and mental. Bodily pain is of

many kinds, as you shall hear. Affections of

the head, catarrh, fever, cholic, fistula, spleen,

haemorrhoids, intumescence, sickness,

ophthalmia, dysentery, leprosy, and many

other discases, constitute bodily affliction.

Mental sufferings are love, anger, fear, hate,

covetousness, stupefaction, despair, sorrow,

CHAPTER 5 malice, disdain, jealousy, envy, and many
पञ्चमोऽध्याय: other passions which are engendered in the
* mind, These and various other afficitions,

mental or corporeal, are comprised under the
(आध्यात्मिकादित्रिविधतापवर्णनम्, भगवान् वासुदेवश्चेति ह `

class of worldly sufferings, which is called
शब्दद्दयस्य व्याख्या, भगवत: पारमार्थिकस्वरूपवर्णनञ्चा) Adhyatmika (natural and inseparable). That

pain to which excellent Brahman, the term
पराशर उवाच

आध्यात्मिकादि मैत्रेय! ज्ञात्वा तापत्रयं Fea:
उत्पन्नज्ञानवैराग्य: प्राप्नोत्यात्यन्तिकं लयम् ॥। RI
आध्यात्मिको वै द्विविध: शारीरो मानसस्तथा।
WIA बहुभिर्भेदैर्भिद्यते AAS स:॥ २॥
गुल्मार्श:-श्वयथु-श्वास-च्छर्ह्यदिभिरनेकधा॥ ३॥
भिद्यते देहजस्तापो मानसं श्रोतमर्हसि।। ४॥
शोका-सूया-वमाने-र्ष्य-मात्सर्य्यदिभवस्तथा।। ५॥
मानसोऽपि द्विजश्रेष्ठ! तापो भवति नैकधा।
इत्येवमादिभिर्भेदैस्तापो ह्याध्यात्मिक: स्मृत:।। ६॥
मृग-पक्षि-मनुष्याद्यै: पिशाचोरग-राक्षसै;।
सरीस्रपाद्यैश्च नृणां जन्यते चाधिभौतिक:॥ ७॥
शीतोष्णवातवर्षाम्बु-वैद्यतादिसमुद्भव:।

तापो द्विजवरश्रेष्ठ! कथ्यते चाधिदैविक:॥ ८॥
दु:खं सहस्रशो भेदैर्भिद्यते मुनिसत्तम।। ९॥

Adhibhautika (natural, but incidental) is
applied, is every kind of evil which is inflicted
(from without) upon men by beasts, birds,
men, goblins, snakes, fiends, or reptiles; and
the pain that is termed Adhidaivika (or
superhuman) is the work of cold, heat, wind,
rain, lightning and other (atmospherical
phenomena). Affliction, Maitreya, is
multiplied in thousands of shapes in the
progress of conception, birth, decay, disease,
death and hell.

सुकुमारतनुर्गर्भे जन्तुर्बहुमलावृते।

उल्वसंवेष्टितो भुग्नपृष्ठग्रीवास्थिसंहति:॥ १०॥
अत्यन्तकटु-तीक्ष्णोष्ण-लवणैर्मातृभोजनै:।
अत्यन्ततापैरत्यर्थं वर्द्धमानातिवेदन:। ११
शकृन्मूत्रमहापङ्कशायी waa पीडित:।। १२॥
निरुच्छ्वास: सचैतन्य: स्मरन् जन्मशतान्यथ।

आस्ते गर्भेऽतिदुखेन निजकर्मनिबन्धन:।। १३॥

The tender (and subtle) animal exists in the

embryo, surrounded by abundant filth, floating
in water, and distorted in its back, neck, and

The wise man having investigated the three bones; enduring severe pain even in the course
kinds of worldly pain, or mental and bodily of its development, as disordered by the acid,
affliction and the like', and having acquired acrid, bitter, pungent, and saline articles of its
