28

THE VISNU-PURANAM

perception or sensation, incapable of feeling,
and destitute of motion,®

मुख्या नगा यतश्चोक्ता मुख्यसर्गस्ततस्त्वयम्।

तं दृष्टाऽसाधकं सर्गममन्यदपरं पुन:।।७॥
त्तस्याभिध्यातय: सर्गस्तिर्यकस्रोताभ्यवर्त्तत।

यस्मात् fete san: स तिर्यक्स्रोतस्तत: स्मृत:॥ ८॥
पश्चादयस्ते विख्याततास्तम: प्राया ह्यवेदिन:।
उत्पथग्राहिणश्चैव तेऽज्ञाने ज्ञानमानिन:। ९॥

अन्त:प्रकाशास्ते सर्वे ATAU परस्परम्।। १०॥

Since immovable things were first created,
this is called the first creation. Brahma,
beholding that it was defective, designed
another; and whilst he thus meditated, the
animal creation was manifested, to the
products of which the term Tiryaksrotas is
applied, from their nutriment following a
winding course*. These were called beasts,
etc., and their characteristic was the quality of
darkness, they being destitute of knowledge,
uncontrolled in their conduct, and mistaking
error for wisdom; being formed of egotism
and self-esteem, labouring under the twenty-
eight kinds of imperfection’, manifesting
inward sensations, and associating with each
other (according to their kinds).

तमप्यसाधकं मत्वा ध्यायतोऽन्यस्ततोऽभवत्।
ऊर्ध्वस्रोतास्तृतीयस्तु सात्विकोर्ध्वमवर्त्तत।। ११॥

ते सुखप्रीतिबहुला बहिरन्तस्त्वनावृता:।

प्रकाशा बहिरन्तश्च ऊर्ध्वस्रोतोद्भवा: स्मृता:।। १२॥
तुष्टात्मनस्तृतीयस्तु देवसर्गस्तु स स्मृत:।

तस्मिन् सर्गेऽभवत् प्रीतिर्निष्यन्ने ब्रह्मणस्तदा।। १३॥
तत्तोऽन्यं स तदा दध्यौ साधकं सर्गमुत्तमम्।
असाधकांस्तु तान् ज्ञात्वा मुख्यसर्गादिसम्भवान्॥ १४॥
तथाभिध्यायतस्तस्य सत्याभिध्यायिनस्तत:।
प्रादुर्लभूव चाव्यक्तादर्वाक BAY साधकम्।। १५॥
यस्मादर्वाकू प्रवर्त्तन्ते ततोऽर्वाक्स्रोतसस्तु ते।

ते च प्रकाशबहुलास्तमोद्रिक्ता रजोऽधिका:।॥ १६॥
तस्मात् ते दु:खबहुला भूयोभूयश्च कारिण:।

प्रकाशा बहिरन्तश्च मनुष्या: साधकाश्च Ti gon

Beholding this creation also imperfect,
Brahma again medicated, and a third creation
appeared, abounding with the quality of
goodness, termed Ordhvasrotas."The beings
thus produced in the Urdhvasrotas creation
were endowed with pleasure and enjoyment,
unencumbered internally or externally, and
luminous within and without. This, termed the
creation of immortals, was the _ third
perfomance of Brahma, who, although well
pleased with it, still found it incompetent to
fulfil his end. Continuing therefore his
medications, there sprang, in consequence of
his infallible purpose, the creation termed
Arvaksrotas’, from indiscrete nature. The
products of this are termed Arvaksrotasas,
from the downward current (of their
nutriment). They abound with the light of
knowledge, but the qualities of darkness and
of foulness predominate. Hence they are
afflicted by evil, and are repeatedly impelled
to action. They have knowledge both
externally and internally, and are. the
instruments (of accomplishing the object of
creation. the liberation of soul). These
creatures were mankind.

इत्येते कथिता: ant: षडत्र मुनिसत्तम।

प्रथमो महत: सर्गो विज्ञेयो ब्रह्मणस्तु स:।। १८॥

तन्मात्राणां द्वितीयश्च भूतसर्गस्तु स स्मृत:।

वैकारिकस्तृतीयस्तु wt ऐन्द्रियक: स्मृत:॥ १९॥

मुख्यसर्गश्चतुर्थस्तु मुख्या वै स्थावरा: स्मृता:।। २०॥

freigatang य: प्रोक्तस्तैर्य्यग्योन्य: स उच्यते।

ऊर्ध्वस्रोतास्तत: षष्ठो देवसर्गस्तु स स्मृत:।। २१॥

T have thus explained to you, excellent
Muni, six® creations. The first creation was
that of Mahat or Intellect, which is also called
the creation of Brahma’. The second was that
of the rudimental principles (Tanmétras),
thence termed the elemental creation (Bhita
sarga). The third was the modified form of
egotism, termed the organic creation, or
creation of the senses (Aindriyaka). These
