BOOK H, CHAP. 12

TE: समुद्राश्च स एव सर्वं

यदस्ति यन्नास्ति च विप्रवर्य।।३७॥
PASS भगवान् यत्तोऽसा-

वशेषमूर्तिर्न च वस्तुभूत:।
ततो हि शैलाब्धिधरादिभेदान्

जानीहि विज्ञानविजृम्भितानि।। ३ cu
यदा तु Ys निजरूपि ad

कर्मक्षये ज्ञानमपास्तदोषम्।

भवन्ति नो वस्तुषु वस्तुभेदा:॥३९॥
वस्त्वस्ति किं कुत्रचिदादिमध्य-

पर्यन्तहीनं सततैकरूपम्।
यच्चान्यथात्वं द्विज! याति भूयो

न तत्तथा कुत्र कुतो fF TAT Kot

कपालिका चूर्ण-रजस्यतोऽणु:।
जनै: स्वकर्मस्तिमितात्मनिश्चयै-

रालक्ष्यते ब्रूहि किमत्र वस्तु।४१॥
तस्मान्न विज्ञानमृतेऽस्ति किञ्चित्

क्वचित् कदाचिद् fea! वस्तुजातम्।
विज्ञानमेकं निजकर्मभेद-

विभिन्नचित्रैर्बहुधाऽभ्युपेतम्॥४२॥

मशेषशोकादिनिरस्तसङ्गम्।

स वासुदेवो न यतोऽन्यदस्ति।४३॥
सद्भाव एषो भवतो मयोक्तो

We यथा सत्यमसत्यमन्यत्।
एतत्तु यत् संव्यवहारभूतं

तत्रापि चोक्तं भुवनाश्रितं ते॥४४॥

सोम: qT: स्वर्गमयश्च काम:।
इत्यादिक्म्माश्रितमार्गदृष्टं

भ्रूरादिभोगाश्च फलानि तेषाम्।।४५॥
यच्चैतद्भुवनगतं मया तवोक्तं

सर्वत्र व्रजति हि तत्र कर्मवश्य:।

तत् कुर्य्यद्विशति fe येन वासुदेवम्।॥४६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे द्वाद्दशोऽध्याय:।

From the watcrs, which are the body of Vis
nu, was produced the lotus-shaped earth, with
its seas and mountains. The stars are Visnu;
the worlds are Visnu; forests, mountains,
regions, rivers, oceans are Visnu : he is all that
is, all that is not. He, the lord, is identical with
knowledge, through which he is all forms, but
is not a substance. You must conccive
therefore mountains, oceans, and all the
diversities of earh and the rest, are the
illusions of the apprehension. When
knowledge is pure, real, universal,
independent of works, and exempt from
defect, then the varieties of substancc, which
are the fruit of the tree of desire, cease to exist
in matter. For what is substance? Where is the
thing that is devoid of beginning, middle, and
end, of one uniform nature? How can reality
be predicated of that which is subject to
change, and reassumes no more its original
character? Earth is fabricated into a jar; the jar
is divided into two halves; the halves are
broken to pieces; the pieces become dust; the
dust becomes atoms. Say, is this reality?
Though it be so understood by man, whose
self-knowledge is impeded by his own acts.
Hence, Brahmana, except discriminative
knowledge, there is nothing anywhere, or at
any time, that is real. Such knowledge is but
one, although it appears manifold, as
diversified by the various consequences of our
own acts. Knowledge perfect, pure, free from
pain, and detaching the affections from all that
causes affliction; knowledge single and cternal
~ is the supreme Vasudeva, besides whom
there is nothing. The truth has been thus
communicated to you by me; that knowledge
which is truth; from which all that differs is
false. That information, however, which is of a
temporal and worldly nature has also been
imparted to you; the sacrificc, the victim. the
fire, the priests, the acid juice, the gods, the
