BOOK I, CHAP. 15

97

out of the ordinary course. Grant these
prayers, oh you who are propitious to the
devout.’

सोम sara
तयैवमुक्तो देवेशो हृषीकेश उवाच ताम्।
प्रणामनम्रामुत्थाप्य वरद: परमेश्वर:।। ६६॥

देवदेव उवाच
भविष्यन्ति महावीर्या एकस्मिन्नेव जन्मनि।
प्रख्यातोदारकर्माणो भवत्या: पतयो दश॥ ६७॥
पुत्रञ्च सुमहात्मानम् अतिवीर्यपराक्रमम्।
प्रजापतिगुणैर्युक्तं त्वमवाप्स्यसि शोभने।। ६ ८॥
त्रैलोक्यमखिलं सूतिस्तस्य चापूरयिष्यति।। ६९॥
त्वञ्चाप्ययोनिजा साध्वी रूपौदार्यगुणान्विता।
मन:प्रीतिकरी FO मत्प्रसादाद् भविष्यसि।। 9 o
इत्युक्त्वान्तर्दधे देवस्तां विशालविलोचनाम्।
सा चेयं मारिषा जाता युष्मत्पत्नी नृपात्मजा:॥७१॥

Soma said— Hrisikesa, the god of gods, the
supreme giver of all blessing, thus prayed to,
raised her from her prostrate attitude, and said,
‘In another life you shall have ten husbands of
mighty prowess, and renowned for glorious
acts; and you shall have a son magnanimous
and valiant, distinguished by the rank of a
patriarch, from whom the various races of men
shall multiply, and by whose posterity the
universe shall be filled. You virtuous lady,
shall be or marvellous birth, and you shall be
endowed with grace and loveliness, delighting,
the heart of men.’ Thus having spoken, the
deity disappeared, and the princess was
accordingly afterwards born as M4rish4 who is
given to you for a wife.’

पराशर उवाच
ad: BA STATE WATT: |
संहृत्य कोपं वृक्षेभ्य: पत्नीं धर्मेण मारिषाम्॥७२॥
दशभ्यस्तु प्रचेतोभ्यो मारिषायां प्रजापति:।

जज्ञे दक्षो महायोगो य: पूर्वं ब्रह्मणोऽभवत्।।७३॥

स तु दक्षो महाभाग: सृष्ट्यर्थं सुमहामते।

पुत्रान् उत्पादयामास प्रजासृष्ट्यर्थमात्मन:।॥ ७४॥
अचरांश्च चरांश्चैय द्विपदोऽथ चतुष्पदान्।

आदेशं ब्रह्मण: कुर्वन् Yo समुपस्थित:।। ७५॥
स OPT मनसा दक्ष: पश्चादप्यसृजत् स्निय:।

ददौ स दशधर्माय कश्यपाय त्रयोदश।। ७६॥
कालस्य नयने युक्ता: सप्तविंशतिमिन्दवे।

तासु देवास्तथा दैत्या AMT गावस्तथा AT: ७७॥
गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्चैव दानवाद्याश्च जज्ञिरे।

तत: प्रभृति मैत्रेय प्रजा मैथुनसम्भवा:।॥।७८]॥
सङ्कल्पाद् दर्शनाद् स्पर्शाद् पूर्वेषामभवत् प्रजा:।
त्तपोविशेषै: सिद्धानां तदात्यन्ततपस्विनाम्।। ७९॥

Parasara said—Soma having concluded,
the Pracetasas took Maris4 as he had enjoined
them righteously to wife, relinquishing their
indignation against the trees: and upon her
they begot the emincnt patriarch, Daksa, who
had (in a former lifc) been born as the son of
Brahma.’ This great sage, for the furtherance
or creation, and the increase of mankind,
created progeny. Obeying the command of
Brahma, he made movable and immovable
things, bipeds and quadrupeds; and
subsequently, by his will, gave birth to
females, ten of whom he bestowed on Dharma,
thirteen on Kagyapa, and twenty-seven, who
regulate the course of time, on the moon’. Of
these, the gods, the Titans, the snake gods,
cattle, and birds, the singers and dancers of the
courts of heaven, the spirits of evil, and other
beings, were born. From that period forwards
living creatures were engendered by sexual
intercourse: before the time of Daksa they
were variously propagated, by the will. by
sight, by touch, and by the influence of
religious austerities practised by devout sages
and holy saints.

भैत्रेय उवाच
अङ्गुग्ष्ठाद्दक्षिणाद्दक्ष:पूर्वंजप्त:श्रुतंश्या।
कथं प्राचेतसो भूय: स सम्भूतो महामुने।। ८ ०॥
