BOOK I, CHAP. 12

75

intent on Govinda. The son of the monarch of
the earth, engrossed by one only idea, beheld
uninterruptedly Visnu seated in his soul, and
saw no other object.

तत: सर्वासु मायासु विलीनासु yA: सुरा:।

संक्षोभं परमं जग्मुस्तत्पराभवशङ्किता:।। ३ vl

ते ater जगद्योनिमनादिनिधनं हरिम्।

शरण्यं शरणं यातास्तपसा तस्य तापिता:।॥ ३ २॥

All their delusive stratagems being thus
foiled, the gods were more perplexed than
ever. Alarmed at their discomfiture, and
afflicted by the devotions of the boy, they
assembled and repaired for succour to Hari the
origin of the world, who is, without beginning
or end; and thus addressed him:
देवा ऊचु:

देव देव जगन्नाथ परेश पुरुषोत्तम।

GAT तपसा तप्तास्त्वां वयं शरणं गता:॥ ३ ३॥
fer दिने कलालेशै: yous पूर्य्यते यथा।

तथायं तपसा ta प्रयात्यृद्धिमहर्निशम्॥३४॥
औत्तानपादितपसा वयमित्थं जनार्दन।

भीतास्त्वां शरणं यातास्तपसस्तं निवर्त्तय।। ३५॥

न विद्म: किं स शक्रत्वं fa सूर्य्यत्वमभीप्सति।
वित्तापाम्बुपसोमानां साभिलाष: पदे नु किम्॥३६॥
तदस्माकं प्रसीदेश हृदयाच्छज्यमुद्धर।
उत्तानपादतनयं तपस: सन्निवर्त्तय॥ ३७॥

Celestials said:~ “God of gods, sovereign
of the world, god supreme. and infinite spirit,
distressed by the austerities of Dhruva, we
have come to you for protection. As the moon
increases in his orb day by day, so this youth
advances incessantly towards superhuman
power by his devotions. Terrified by the
ascetic practices of the son of Uttanapada, we
have come to you for succour. Do you allay
the fervour of his meditations. We know not to
what station he aspires: to the throne of Indra,
the regency of the solar or lunar sphere, or to
the sovereignty of riches or of the deep. Have
compassion on us, lord; remove this affliction
from our breasts; diverse the son of
Uttanapada from persevering in his penance.”

भगवानुवाच
aed न च सूर्य्यत्वं नैवाम्बुपधनेशताम्।
प्रार्थयत्येष यं कामं तं करोम्यखिलं YT ३८॥
यात Sar यथाकामं स्वस्थानं विगतज्वरा:।
निवर्त्तयाम्यहं बालं तपस्यासक्तमानसम्॥ 3 ९॥

Visnu replied to the gods.: “The lad
desireth neither the rank of Indra, nor the solar
orb, nor the sovereignty of wealth or of the
ocean: all that be solicits, I will grant. Return
therefore, deities, to your mansions as ye list,
and be no more alarmed: I will put an end to
the penance of the boy, whose mind is
immersed in deep contemplation.”

पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्ता देवदेवेन प्रणम्य त्रिदशास्तत:।

प्रययु: स्वानि धिष्णानि शतक्रतुपुरोगमा:।॥।४०॥
भगवानपि सर्वात्मा तन्मयत्वेन तोषित:।

गत्वा ध्रुवमुवाचेदं चतुर्भुजवपुर्हरि:।। ४१॥

The gods, beings thus pacificd by the
supreme, saluted him respectfully and retired,
and, preceded by Indra, returned to their
habitations: but Hari. who is all things,
assuming a Shape with four arms proceeded to
Dhruva, being pleased with his identity of
nature, and thus addressed him:

उत्तानपादे भद्रं ते तपसापिरतोषित:।
वरदोऽहमनुप्राप्तो वरं वरय सुव्रत॥४२॥

बाह्यार्थेनिरपेक्षं ते मयि चित्रं यदाहितम्।

तुष्टोऽहं भवतस्तेन AE वृणीष्व at परम्॥४३॥

Visnu said-~ “Son of Uttanapada, be
prosperous. Contented with your. devotions, I,
the giver of boons, am present. Demand what
boon you desire. In that you have wholly
disregarded external objects, and fixed your

thoughts on me, I am well pleased with you.
Ask, therefore, a suitable reward.”

पराशर उवाच
SAN तद् गदितं तस्य देवदेवस्य बालक:।
