454

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Ha उवाच
भो भो दानपते।! वाक्यं क्रियतां प्रीतये मम।
इत: स्यन्दनमारुह्य गम्यतां नन्दगोकुलम्॥ १३॥
वसुदेवसुतौ ax विष्णोरंशसमुद्भवौ।
नाशाय fener सम्भूतौ मम दुष्टौ प्रवर्द्धत:।। १४॥
धनुर्महा ममाप्यत्र चतुर्द्दश्यां भविष्यति।
आनेयौ भवता गत्वा मल्लयुद्धाय तावुभौ।। १५॥
चाणूर-मुष्टिकौ मल्लौ नियुद्धकुशलौ मम।
ताभ्यां सहानयोर्युद्धं सर्वलोकोऽत्र THAT १६॥
नाग: कुवलयापीडो महामात्रप्रचोदित:।
स वा निहंस्यते पापौ वसुदेवात्मजौ शिशू॥ gon
at हत्वा वसुदेवश्च नन्दगोपञ्च दुर्म्मतिम्।
हनिष्ये पितरं चैनमुग्रसेनं सुदुर्म्मतिम्॥ १८॥
तत: समस्तगोपानां गोधनान्यखिलान्यहम्।
वित्तं चापि हरिष्यामि दुष्टानां मद्वधैषिणाम्॥ १९॥
त्वामृते यादवाश्चैते, दुष्टा दानपते। मयि।
एतेषाञ्च वधायाहं प्रयतिष्याम्ननुक्रमात्॥ २०॥
ततो निष्कण्टकं wed राज्यमेतदयादवम्।
प्रशासिष्ये त्वया त्तस्मान्मत्रीत्या वीर! गम्यताम्॥ २१॥
यथा a माहिषं सर्पिर्दंधि वाप्युपहार्य ai
गोपा: समानयन्त्याशु त्वया वाच्यास्तथा तथा।। २२॥

“Lord of liberal gifts,' attend to my words,
and, out to friendship for me, perform my
orders. Ascend your chariot and go hence to
the station of the herdsman Nanda. Two vile
boys, portions of Visnu, have been born there,
for the express object of effecting my
destruction. On the fourteenth lunation I have
to celebrate the festival of arms,” and I wish
them to be brought here by you, to take part in
the games, and that the people may see them
engage in a boxing match with my two
dexterous athlete:, Chanira and Mustika; or
haply my elephant Kuvalayapida, driven
against them by his rider, shall kill these two
iniquitous youngsters, sons of Vasudeva.
When they are out of the way, I will put to
death Vasudeva himself, the cowherd Nanda,
and my foolish father, Ugrasena, and I will

seize upon the herds and flocks, and all the
possessions, of the rebellious Gopas, who have
ever been my foes. Except you, lord of
liberality, all the Yadavaa are hostile to me;
but I will devise schemes for their extirpation,
and I shall then reign over my kingdom, in
concert with you, without any annoyance.
Through regard for me, therefore, do you go as
I direct you; and you shall command the
cowherds to bring in with speed their supplies
of milk and butter and curds.”

पराशर उवाच

इत्याज्ञप्सस्तदाक्रूरो महाभागवतो द्विज।

प्रीतिमानभवत् कृष्णं श्वो द्रक्ष्यामीति सत्वर:।। २३॥

तथेत्युक्त्वा च राजानं रथमारुह्य शोभनम्।

निश्चक्रान्त तत: geat मथुराया मधुप्रिय:॥ २४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चभांशे पञ्चदश: अध्याय:॥

Being thus instructed, the illustrious

Akrtira readily undertook to visit Krsna, and,
ascending his stately chariot, he went forth
from the city of Mathura.

५२२३

NOTES

1. Danapati- The epithet refers to Akrira's
possession of the Syamantaka gem (see Bk. IV. Ch.
XII); although, as here used by Karisa, it is an
anachronism, the gem not becoming his until after
Krsna's maturity.

2, Dhanurmaha (धनुर्मह:): the same phrase occurs
in the different authorities. In its ordinary
acceptation it would imply any military festival.
There is one of great celebrity, which, in the south
of India, closes the Dasahara. or festival of Durga,
when military exercises are performed and a field is
ravaged, as typical of the opening of a campain.
Worship is paid to military implements. The proper
day for this is the Vijaya dasSami or tenth of the
light half of Asgwin, falling about the end to
September or beginning of October. Trans. Bombay
Sac. Il, 73; also Amara Kosa. under the word
लोहाभिसार: (Lohabhiséra). Both our text and that of
the Bhagavata however, intimate the celebration of
the feast in question, on the fourteenth day of the
fortnight (in what month is not specified), and an
