72 THE VISNU-PURANAM
पुलस्त्य उवाच तस्मिन्नेव जगद्धाम्नि aa: कुर्वीत निश्चलम्। ५ २॥
wi ब्रह्म Ut धाम योऽसौ ब्रह्म तथा परम्। एवमेकाग्रचित्तेन तन्मयेन धृतात्मना।

तमाराध्य हरिं याति मुक्तिमप्यतिदुर्लभाम्॥४५॥

Pulastya said: “He who adores the divine
Hari. the supreme soul, supreme glory, who is
the supreme Brahm, obtains what is difficult
of attainment, eternal liberation.” “When that
Janarddana,”

क्रतुरुवाच
यो यज्ञपुरुषो GA योगे य: WA: पुमान्।
तंस्मिंस्तुष्टे यदप्राप्यं किं तदस्ति जनार्दने।। ४६॥

Kratu observed— “who in sacrifices is the
soul of sacrifice, and who in _ abstract
contemplation is supreme spirit, is pleased,
there is nothing man may not acquire.”
पुलह Sard

ऐन्द्रमिन्द: परं स्थानं यमाराध्य जगत्पतिम्।

प्राप यज्ञपतिं विष्णुं तमाराधय Ya ४७॥

Pulaha said:— “Indra, having worshipped

the lord of the world, obtained the dignity of

king of the celestials. Do you adore, pious
youth, that Visnu, the lord of sacrifice.”

afag sara

प्राणोत्याराधिते विष्णौ मनसा ae यदिच्छति।
त्रैलोक्यान्तर्गतं स्थानं fay वत्सोत्तमोत्तमम।।४८॥

Vasistha exclaimed “Anything, child, that
the mind covets., may be obtained by
propitiating Visnu, even though it be the
station that is the most excellent in the three
worlds.”

ga zara
आराध्य: कथितो tat भवद्भि: प्रणतस्य मे।
मया ae परितोषाय यज्जप्तव्यं तदुच्यताम्।४९॥
यथा चाराधनं TAT मया कार्यं महात्मन:।
प्रसादसुमुखास्तन्मे कथयन्तु महर्षय:॥ ७५ oll
राजपुत्र यथा विष्णोराराधनपरैर्नरै:।
कार्यमाराधनं TY यथावच्छोतुमर्हसि।। ५ १॥
ब्राह्मार्थानखिलांश्चित्तं त्याजयेत् प्रथमं नर:।

जप्तव्यं यन्निबोधैतत् त्वं न: पार्थिवनन्दन।। ५३॥,
हिरण्यगर्भपुरुषप्रधानाव्यक्तरूपिणे।

ऊँ नमो वासुदेवाय शुद्धज्ञानस्वभाविने॥ ५४॥
एतञ्जजग्पृभगवग्न्जर्प्यस्त्रम्यन्यृवौमनु:।
पितामहस्तव YU तस्य FBT जनार्दन:॥५५॥
ददौ यथाभिलषिताम् ऋद्धिं त्रैलोक्यदुर्लभाम्।
war त्वमपि गोविन्दं तोषयैतत् War AAT ५६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे एकादशोऽध्याय:।

Dhruva replied to them: “You have told
me, humbly bending before you, what deity is
to be propitiated: now inform me what prayer
is to be medicated by me, that will offer him
gratification. May the great Rsis. looking upon
me with favour, instruct me how I am to
propitiate the god.” The Rsis answered:
“Prince, you deserve to hear how the adoration
of Visnu has been performed by those who
have been devoted to his service. The mind
must first be made to forsake 4ll external
immpressions, and a man must then fix it
steadily on that being in whom the world is.
By him whose thoughts are thus concentrated
on one only object, and wholly filled by it,
whose spirit is firmly under concrol; the
prayer that we shall repeat to you is to be
inaudibly recited: ‘Om! glory to Vasudeva,
whose essence is divine wisdom; whose form
is inscrutable, or is manifest as Brahma, Vis

nu, and Siva. This prayer, which was formerly
uttered by your grandsire, the Manu
Svayambhuva, and propitiated by which, Vis
nu conferred upon him the prosperity be
desired, and which was unequalled in the three
worlds, is to be recited by you. Do you
constantly repeat this prayer, for the
gratification of Govinda.”
६३३३
NOTES
1, The Matsya, Brahma. and Vayu Puranas speak
of but one wife of Utténapdada. and. call her Sunnita
: they say also that she had four sons. Apaspati (or
