52

THE VISNU-PURANAM

all her train, fo witness his deeds. Virabhadra the
fierce, abiding in the region of ghosts, is the
minister of the anger of Devi. And he then created,
from the pores of his skin, powerful demigods, the
mighty attendants upon Rudra. of equal valour and
strength, who started by hundreds and thousands
into existence. Then a loud and confused clamour
ailed all the expanse of ether, and inspired the
denizens of heaven with dread. The mountains
tottered, and earth shook, the winds roared, and the
depths of the sea were disturbed; the fires lost their
radiance, and the sun grew pale; the planets of the
firmament shone not, neither did the stars give
light; the Rshis ceased their hymns, and gods and
demons were mute; and thick darkness eclipsed the
chariots of the skies.”

“Then from the gloom emerged tearful and
numerous forms, shouting the cry of battle; who
instantly broke or overturned the sacrificial
columns, trampled upon the altars, and danced
amidst the oblations. Running wildly hither and
thither, with the speed of wind, they tossed about
the implements and vessels of sacrifice, which
looked like stars precipitated from the heavens. The
piles of food and beverage for the gods, which had
been heaped up like mountains; the rivers of milk;
the banks of curds and butter; the sands of honey
and butter-milk and sugar; the mounds of
condiments and spices of every flavour; the
undulating knolls of flesh and other viands; the
celestial liquors, pastes, and confections, which had
been prepared; these the spirits of wrath devoured
or defiled or scattered abroad. Then talling upon the
host of the gods, these vase and resistess Rudras
beat or terrified them, mocked and insulted the
nymphs and goddesses, and quickly put an end to
the rite, although defended by all the gods; being
the ministers of Rudra's wrath, and similar to
himself. “Some then made a hideous clamour,
whilst ochers fearfully shouced, when Yajiia was
decapitated. For the divine Yajfia. the lord of
sacrifice. then began to fly up to heaven, in the
shape of a decr; and Virabhadra, of immeasurable
spirit, apprehending his power, cut off his vast
head, after he had mounted into the sky.7 Daksa the
patriarch, his sacrifice being destroyed, overcome
with terror, and utterly broken in spirit, fell then
upon the ground, where his head was spurned by
the feet of the cruel Virabhadra.* The thirty scores

of sacred divinities were all presently bound, with a
band of fire, by their lion-like foe; and they all then
addressed him, crying, 'Oh Rudra, have mercy upon
your servants: oh lord, dismiss thine anger.’ Thus
spoke Brahma and the other gods, and the patriarch
Daksa: and raising their hands, they said, "Declare,
mighty being, who you are.’ Virabhadra said, 'T am
not a god, nor an Aditya; nor am I come hither for
enjoyment, nor curious to behold the chiefs of the
divinities: know that I am come to destroy the
sacrifice of Daksa, and that I am called Virabhadra.
the issue of the wrath of Rudra. Bhadrakali also,
who has sprung from the anger of Devi, is sent here
by the god of gods to destroy this rite. Take refuge,
king of kings, with him who is the lord of Uma; for
better is the anger of Rudra than the blessings of
other gods.'

"Having heard the words of Virabhadra, the
righteous Daksa propitiated the mighty god, the
holder of the trident, MaheSvara. The hearth of
sacrifice, deserced by the Braéhmanas, had been
consumed; Yajfia had been metamorphosed to an
antelope; the fires of Rudra’s wrath had been
kindled; the attendants, wounded by the tridents of
the servants of the god, were groaning with pain;
the pieces of the uprooted sacrificial posts were
acattered here and there; and the fragments of the
meat-offerings were carried off by flights of hungry
vultures, and herds of howling jackals. Suppressing
his vital airs, and taking up a posture of meditation,
the many-sighted victor of his foes, Daksa fixed his
eyes every where upon his thoughts. Then the god
of gods appeared from the altar, resplendent as a
thousand suns, and smiled upon him, and said.
"Daksa, your sacrifice has been destroyed through
sacred knowledge: I am well pleased with you:’ and
then he smiled again, and said, 'What shall I do for
you: declare, together with the preceptor of the
gods.’

"Then Daksa, frightened, alarmed, and agitated,
his eyes suffused with tears, raised his hands
revcrentially to his brow, and said, ‘If lord, you are
pleased; if I have found favour in your sight; if I
am to be the object of your benevolence; if you will
confer upon me a boon, this is the blessing 1 solicit,
that all these provisions for the solemn sacrifice,
which have been collected with much trouble and
during a long time, and which have now been
eaten, drunk, devoured, burnt, broken, scattered
