BOOK I, CHAP. 9

59

immortals, vanquished by the demon host,
have fled to you for succour.”

पराशर Jars
एवं संस्तूयमानस्तु भगवाञ्छङ्खचक्रधूक्।
जगाम दर्शनं तेषां मैत्रेय परमेश्वर:।। ६५॥
तं दृष्टा ते तदा देवा:शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम्।
अपूर्वरूपसंस्थानं तेजसां राशिमूञ्जितम्।। ६६॥
प्रणम्य प्रणता: पूर्वं संक्षोभस्तिमितेक्षणा:।
तुष्टुवु: पुण्डरीकाक्षं पितामहपुरोगमा:।। ६७॥

ParéSara continued-Thus prayed to, the
supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch
and discus, showed himself to them: and
beholding the lord of gods, bearing a shell, a
discus, and a mace, the assemblage of
primeval form, and radiant with embodied
light. Pitamaha and the other deities, their eyes
moistened with rapture, first paid him homage
and then thus addressed him :

देवा ऊचु:
नमो नमोऽविशेषस्त्वं त्वं Ter त्वं पिनाकधृक्।
इन्द्रस्त्वमग्नि: पवनो वरुण: सविता यम:। ६ ८॥
वसवो wea: साध्या feed देवगणा भवान्।
योऽयं तवागतो देव समीपं देवतागण:॥ ६ ९॥
स त्वमेव जगत्स्रष्टा यत: सर्वगतो भवान्।

त्वं यज्ञस्त्वं वषट्कारस्त्वमोङ्कार: प्रजापति:।।७०॥
वेद्यावेद्यञ्च सर्वात्मंस्त्वन्मयञ्चाखिलं जगत्।
त्वामत्र शरणं विष्णो प्रयाता दैत्यनिर्जिता:।॥७१॥

Gods said— “Repeated salutation to you,
who are indefinable: you are Brahma; you are
the wonder of the Pinaka bow (Siva); you are
Indra; you are fire, air, the god of waters, the
sun, the king of death (Yama), the Vasus, the
Maruts (the winds), the Sddhyas, and
Visvadevas. This assembly of divinities, that
now has come before you, you are; for, the
creator of the world, you are every where. You
are the sacrifice, the prayer of oblation, the
mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all
creatures: you are all that is to be known, or to
be unknown: oh universal soul, the whole

world consists of you. We, discomfited by the
Daityas, have fled to you, oh Visnu, for
refuge.

aa wale सर्वात्मंस्तेजस्याप्याययस्व न;।

तावदात्तिस्तथा वाञ्छा तावन्मोहस्तथासुखम्॥ 9 २॥

यावन्नायाति शरणं त्वामशेषाघनाशनम्।

त्वं प्रसादं प्रसन्नात्मन् प्रपन्नानां HoT न:।।७३॥।

तेजसां नाथ सर्वेषां स्वशक्त्याप्यायनं HEI ७४॥

Spirit of all, have compassion upon us;
defend us with your mighty power. There will
be affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until
your protection is obtained : but you are the
remover of all sins. Do you then, oh pure of
spirit, show favour unto us who have fled to
you: oh lord of all, protect us with your great
power, in union with the goddess who is your
strength®.”

पराशर उवाच
एवं संस्तूयमानस्तु प्रणतैरमरैर्हरि:।
प्रसन्नदृष्टिर्भगवानिदमाह स विश्वकृत्॥७५॥

Hari, the creator of the universe, being thus
prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled,
and thus spoke:

तेजसो भवतां at: करिष्याम्युपबृंहणम्।
वदाम्यहं यत् क्रियतां भवद्भिस्तदिदं सुरा:॥७६॥
आनीय सहिता दैत्यै: क्षीराव्यौ सकलौषधी:।
मन्थानं मन्दरं कृत्वा नेत्रं Hear तु वासुकिम्।७७॥
मथ्यताममृतं देवा: सहाये मय्यवस्थिते।

Visnu said~ "With renovated energy, oh
gods, I will restore your strength. Do you act
as I enjoin. Let all the gods, associated with
the Asuras, cast all sorts of medicinal herbs
into the sea of milk; and then taking the
mountain Mandara for the churning-Kick, the
serpent Vasuki for the rope, churn the ocean
together for ambrosia; depending upon my aid.

सामपूर्वञ्च दैतेयास्तत्र साहाय्यकर्मणि।। ७८॥
सामान्यफलभोक्तारो यूयं वाच्या भविष्यथ।
भथ्यमाने च तत्राव्यौ यत् समुत्पद्यतेऽमृतम्॥७९॥
