400

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Bhimiputra, 14 years before him. In this and the
preceding name we have appellations of
considerable celebrity in the traditions of the
Buddhists. Vidmiséra, read also Vindhusara,
Vilvisara, etc., is most probably their Vimbasara,
who was born at the same time with Sakya and was
reigning at Rajgrha when the began his religious
career. The Mahdvarhsa says that Siddhatto and
Bimbisaro were attached friends, as their fathers
had been before them. Sakya is said to have died in
the reign of Ajatasatru, the son of Vimbasira, in the
eighth year of his reign. The Vayu transposes these
names and the Matsya still more alters and order‘of
Ajatasatru; but the Bhagavata concurs with our text.
The Buddhist authority differs from the Puranas
materially as to the duration of the reigns, giving to
Bimbisaro 52 years and to Ajatasattu 32 : the latter,
according to the same, murdered his father.
Mahavarnsa, p. 10. We may therefore with some
confidence claim for these princes a date of about
six centuries B.C. They are considered
contemporary with Sudhoddhana, in the list of the
Aiksvakavas (p. Bk. IV. Ch. XXII. n. 20).

14. Harsaka, 25 years V.; Vansaka, 24, M.

15. 33 years V.; Udibhi or Udasin, 33, M.
According to the Vayu, Udaya or Udayasva
founded Kusumapur or Pataliputra, on the southern
angle of the Ganges : 4 a पुरवरं राजा पृथिव्यां कुसुमाद्वयं।
गंगाया: दक्षिणेकोणे चतुर्येऽब्दे करिष्यति॥ The legends of
Sakya, consistently with this tradition, take no
notice of this city in his peregrinations on either
bank of the Ganges. The MahavarhSa calls the son
and successor of Ajatasatru, Udayibhadako
(Udayinbhadraka) : Bk. I. Ch. IL

16. 42 and 43 years V.; 40 and 43, M. The
Mahavarhsga has in place of these, Anuruddhako,
Mundo and Nagadaso; alf in succession patricides ;
the last deposed by an insurrection of the people.

17. The several authorities agree in the number
of ten Saigunagas and in the aggregate years of
their reigns, which the Matsya and the Bhagavata
call 360 : the Vayu has 362, with which the several
periods correspond : the details of the Matsya give
363. The Vayu and Matsya call the Saisunagas, Ks
atrabandhus, which may designate an inferior order
of Ksatriyas : they also observe, that contemporary
with the dynasties already specified, the Pauravas,
the Varhadrathas and Magadhas, there were other
races of royal descent; as, Aiksvakava princes, 24 :

Pancalas, 25, V.; 27, M. : Kalakas or Kasakas or
Kaseyas, 24 : Haihayas, 24, V.; 28, M.: Kalingas,
32, V.; 40, M. : Sakas, V.; ASmakas, M, 25 ;
Kuravas, 26 : Maithilas, 28 : Siirasenas, 23 : and
Vitihotras, 20.

18. The Bhagavata calls him Mahapadmapati,
the lord of Mahdpadma; which the commentator
interprets, 'sovereign of an infinite host’ or 'of
immense wealth;’ Mahapadma signifying 100,000
millions. The Vayu and Matsya, however, consider
Mahapadma as another name of Nanda.

19. So the Bhagavata also; but it would be more
compatible with chronology to consider the nine
Nandas as so many descents, The Vayu and Matsya
give eighty-eight years to Mahapadam and only the
remaining twelve to Sumflya and the rest of the
remaining eight; these twelve years being occupied
with the efforts of Kautilya to expel the Nandas.
The Mahavarhga, evidently intending the same
events, gives names and circumstances differently :
it may be doubted if with more accuracy. On the
disposal of Nagadasa, the people raised to the
throne the minister Susundgo, who reigned eighteen
years. This prince is evidently confounded with the
Sisunaga of the Puranas. He was succeeded by his
son Kalasoka, who reigned twenty years; and he
was succeeded by his sons, ten of whom reigned
together for twenty-two years : subsequently there
were nine, who, according to their seniority,
reigned for twenty-two years. The Br&hmana
Canaka put the ninth surviving brother, named
Dhana Nando (Rich-Nanda), to death and installed
Chandagupta Mahavarnsa p. 15 and 21. These
particulars, notwithstanding the alteration of some
of the names, belong clearly to one story; and that
of the Buddhists looks as if it was borrowed and
modified from that of the Brahmanas. The
commentary on the Mahavarhga, translated by
Turnour (Introduction, p. xxxviii), calls the sons of
K4lasoka the ‘nine Nandas;’ but another Buddhist
authority, the Dipavarnsa, omits Kalasoko and says
that Susundgo had ten brothers, who after his
demise reigned collectively twenty-two years.
Journal of the As. Soc. Of Bengal Nov. 1838, p.
930.

20. For the particulars of the story here alluded
to see the Mudra Raksasa, Hindu Theatre, vol. II.
Kautilya is also called, according to the
commentator on out text, Vatsyayana, Visnugupta
