BOOK I, CHAP. 22

133

furnish the individuals most frequently engaged in
the interruption of the penances of holy sages, such
as Menaka. Sahajanya, Ghrtaci. Pramloca, Visvaci,
and Piirvacitti. Urvasi is of a different order to both,
being the daughter of Narayana. Rambha,
Tillotama, Misrakegi. are included amongst the
Laukika nymphs. There are also fourteen Ganas, or
troops, of Apsaraas, bearing peculiar designations,
as Ahitas. Sobhayantis, Vagavatis, etc.

22. The Kirma, Matsya, Brahma, Linga. Agni.
Padma, and Vayu Puranas agree generally with our
text in the description of Kagyapa's wives and
progeny. The Vayu enters most into details, and
contains very long catalogues of the names of the
different characters descended from the sage. The
Padma and Matsya and the Hari Varga repeat the
story, but admit several variations, some of which
have been adverted to in the preceding notes.

23. We have a considerable variation here in the
commentary, and it may be doubted if the allusion
in the text is accurately explained by either of the
versions. In one it is said that ‘Brahma. the
grandsire of the Gandharvas. etc., appointed the
seven Rsis. who were born in a former Manvantara.
to be his sons. or to be the intermediate agents in
creation : he created no other beings himself, being
engrossed by the sacrificial ceremony

सप्तर्षीन् t पितामहो ब्रह्मा
Te प्रजासर्गाधिकारे कल्ययामास न त्वन्यान् wat wa
`तद्यज्ञव्यापृतत्वात्। Instead of "putratwe," ‘in the state of
sons.’ the reading is sometimes "Pitratwe." in the
character of fathers .' that is, to all other beings.
Thus the gods and the rest, who in a former
Manvantara originated from Kasyapa, were created
in the present period as the offspring of the seven
Rsis. The other explanation agrees with the
preceding in ascribing the birth of all creatures to
the intermediate agency of the seven Rsis, but calls
them the actual sons of Brahma, begotten at the
sacrifice of Varuna, in the sacrificial fire : एवं कथा
wa व्यापृतेन ब्रह्मणा देवकन्यादर्शनस्कन्ने रेतसि अग्नौ हुते जाता:
सप्तर्षय: पुत्रत्वे कल्पिता इति। authority for the story is no
given, beyond its being in other Puranas, पुराणान्तरेषु 17
has the air of a modern mystification. The latter
member of the passage is separated altogether from
the foregoing, and carried on to what follows : thus;
"In the war of the Gandharvas, serpents. gods and
demons, Diti having lost her children,’ etc.: the
word 'virodha’ being understood, it is said, विरोध इति

शेषे। This is defended by the authority of the Hari
Varnga, where the passage occurs word for word,
except in the last half stanza, which, instead of
गन्धर्वभोगिदेवानां दानवानां स सत्तम्। occurs ततो विरोधे Farsi
दानवानां च भारत। The parallel passages are thus
rendered by M. Langlois : 'Le Mouni Svarotchicha
avoit cessé de régner quand cette création eut lieu :
c'était sous l'empire du Menoa Vevasvata le
sacrifice de Varouna avait commence. La premiére
création fut celle de Brahma, quand il Jugea qu'il
était temps de procéder 4 son sacrifice, et que,
souverain aieul du monde- il forma luiméme dans
sa peasée et enfanta les sept Brahmarchis.’

24. This legend occurs in all those Puranas in
which the account of Kagyapa's family is related.

CK
