466

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 20
विंशोऽध्याय:
(श्रीकृष्णस्य कुब्जानुग्रह: धनु:शालाप्रवेश:, कंसवधश्च।)

भवत्या नीयते सत्यं वदेन्दीवरलोचने।। २॥
सकामेनेव सा प्रोक्ता सानुरागा हरिं प्रति।
प्राह सा ललितं Hoa तद्दर्शनबलात्कृता।॥ ३॥
कान्त! कस्मान्न जानासि कंसेनाभिनियोजिताम्।
नैकवक्रेति विख्यातामनुलेपनकर्म्मणि॥ ४॥
भवाम्यहमतीवास्य प्रसादधनभाजनम्।।५॥

As they proceeded along the high road,
they saw coming towards them a young girl,
who was crooked, carrying a pot of unguent,
Krsna addressed her sportively, and said, "For
whom are you carrying that unguent? tell me,
lovely maiden; tell me truly.” Spoken to as it
were through affection, Kubj4 well disposed
towards Hari, replied to him also mirthfully,
being smitten by his appearance; “Know you
not, beloved, that I am the servant of Kansa,
and appointed, crooked as I am, to prepare his
perfumes. Unguent ground by any other he
does not approve of: hence I am enriched
through his liberal rewards.”

श्रीकृष्ण उवाच
grag राजार्हं रुचिरं रुचिरानने।
आवयोगत्रिसदृशं दीयतामनुलेपनम्।। ६॥

Then said Krsna, “Fair-faced damsel, give
us of this unguent, fragrant and fit for kings, as
much as we may rub upon our bodies.”

WII उवाच

श्रुत्वैतदाह सा कुब्जा गृह्यतामिति सादरम्।
अनुलेपञ्च प्रददौ गात्रयोग्यमथोभयो:।।७॥

भक्तिच्छेदानुलिप्ताङ्गौ ततस्तौ पुरुषर्षभौ।

। सेन्द्रचापौ विराजेतां सितकृष्णाविवाम्बुदौ॥ cit
उत्पाट्य तीलयामास Neu
चकर्ष पद्भ्याञ्च तदा ऋजुत्वं केशवोऽनयत्।
aa: सा ऋजुतां WAT योषितामभवद् वरा।। १०॥ `
विलासललितं wre प्रेमगर्भभरालसम्।
वस्त्रे प्रगृह्य गोविन्दं व्रज गेहं ममेति An gen
आयास्ये भवतीगेहमिति at प्रहसन् Bit:
fared जहासोच्चै रामस्योलोक्य चाननम्॥ १२॥

“Take it,” answered Kubja; and she gave
them as much of the unguent as was sufficient
for their persons; and they rubbed it on various
parts of their faces and bodies,’ till they
looked like two clouds, one white and one
black, decorated by the many-tinted bow of
Indra. Then Krsna, skilled in the curative are,
took hold of her, under the chin, with the
thumb and two fingers, and lifted up her head,
whilst with his feet he pressed down her feet;
and in this way he made her straight. When
she was thus relieved from her deformity, she
was a most beautiful woman; and, filled with
gratitude and affection, she took Govinda by
the garment, and invited him to her house,
Promising to come at some other time, Krsna
smilingly dismissed her, and then laughed
aloud on beholding the countenance of
Baladeva.”

भक्तिच्छेदानुलिप्ताङ्गौ नीलपीताम्बरौ च तौ।
धनु:शालां ततो यातौ चित्रमाल्योपशोभितौ।। १३॥
TEMA AEA FUN गृहीत्वापूरयद्धनु:।। १४॥
तत: पूरयता तेन भज्यमानं बलाद्धनु: .

चकार सुमहाशब्दं HAT येन पूरिता॥ १५॥
अनुयुक्तौ ततस्तौ तु भग्ने धनुषि रक्षिभि:।
रक्षिसैन्यं निहत्योभौ निष्क्रान्तौ कार्मुकालयात्।। १६॥

Dressed in blue and yellow garments, and
anointed with fragrant unguents, KeSava and
Rama proceeded to the hall of arms, which
