BOOK IV, 3

CHAPTER 3

तृतीयोऽध्याय:

ममरणादिधर्म्ममवाव परं परवतामच्युतपदम्।। २॥
इत्येतन्मान्धातुर्दुहितृसम्बन्धाद्व्याख्यातम्।। ३॥

यश्चैतत् सौभरिचरितमनुस्मरति पठति शृणोत्यवधारयति,
तस्याष्टौ जन्मान्यसन्मतिरसद्ध्म्मो वा मनसोऽसन्मार्गाचरण-
मङेषहेयेषु वा ममत्वं न भवतीति। अतो मानधातु:
पुत्रसन्ततिरभिधीयते।।४॥

Having thus communed with himself,
Saubhari abandoned his children, his home
and all his splendour and accompanied by his
wives, entered the forest, where he daily
practised the observances followed by the
ascetics termed Vaikhanasas (or anchorites
having families), until he had cleansed himself
from all sin. When his intellect had attained
maturity, he concentrated in his spirit the
sacramental fires' and became a religious
mendicant. Then having consigned all his acts
to the supreme, he obtained the condition of
Acyuta, which knows no change and is not
subject to the vicissitudes of _ birth,
transmigration or death. Whoever reads or
hears or remembers or understands, this
legend of Saubhari and his espousal of the
daughters of Mandhatri, shall never, for eight
successive births, be addicted to evil thoughts
not shall he act unrighteously, nor shall his
mind dwell upon improper objects, not shall
he be influenced by selfish attachments. The
line of Mandh4ta is now resumed.

317

अम्बरीषस्य मान्धातुस्तनयस्य युवनाश्व: पुत्रोऽभूत्। तस्मात्
हरित:, यतोऽङ्गिरसो हारिता:॥५॥
The son of Ambarisa, the son of Mandhata,
was Yuvandsva; his son was Harita,’ from
whom the Angiras Haritas were descended.’

रसातले मौनेया नाम गन्धर्वा:

नयिष्यापि॥७॥

In the regions below the earth the
Gandharvas called Mauneyas (or sons of the
Muni Kasyapa), who were sixty millions in
number, had defeated the tribes of the Nagas
or snake-gods and seized upon their most
precious jewels and usurped their dominion.
Deprived of their power by the Gandharvas,
the serpent chiefs addressed the god of the
gods, as he awokc from his slumbers; and the
blossoms of his lotus eyes opened while
listening to their hymns. They said, "Lord,
how shall we be delivered from this great
fear?” Then replied the first of males, who is
without beginning, I will enter into the person
of Purukutsa, the son of Mandhatri, the son of
Yuvanasva and in him will I quiet these
iniquitous Gandharvas.”

इत्याकर्ण्य भगवते कृतप्रणामा: पुनर्नागलोकमागता:
पन्नगपतयो नर्म्मदाञ्च पुरुकुत्सानयनाय चोदयामासु:॥ ८॥

On hearing these words, the snake-gods

bowed and withdrew and returning to their
country dispatched Narmada to solicit the aid

of Purukutsa.*
सा चैन रसातले नीतवती रसातलगतश्चासौ

स्वभवनमाजगाम। सकलपन्नगपतयश्च नर्म्मदायै at ददु:।
