BOOK III, CHAP. 6

243

in its narratives of primary and subsidiary
creation, of families and of periods, the mighty
Visnu is declared in this Purana.’

अङ्गानि चतुरो वेदा मीमांसा न्यायविस्तर:।
पुराणं धर्मशास्त्रञ्च विद्या ह्येताश्चतुर्दश।। २८॥
आयुर्वेदो धनुर्वॆदो गान्धर्वश्चैव ते त्रय:।
अर्थशास्त्रं चतुर्थन्तु विद्या ह्यष्टादशैव ता:॥२९॥

The four Vedas, the six Angas (or
subsidiary portions of the Vedas, viz., Siksa,
rules of reciting the prayers, the accents and
tones to be observed; Kalpa, ritual; Vyakarana,
grammar, Nirukta, glossaries comment;
Chandas, metre and Jyotisa, (astronomy), with
Mimarhsa (theology), Nyaya (logic), Dharma
(the institutes of law) and the Puranas,
constitute the fourteen principal branches of
knowledge or they are considered as eighteen,
with the addition of these four; the Ayurveda,
medical science (as taught by Dhanvantari);
Dhanurveda, the science of archery or arms,
taught by Bhrgu; Gandharbaveda or the drama
and the arts of music, dancing, of which the
Muni Bharata, was the author; and the
Arthsastram or science of government, as laid
down first by Brhaspati.

राजर्षय: पुनस्तेभ्य ऋषिप्रकृतयस्त्रय:।। ३०॥

There are three kinds of Rsis or inspired
sages; royal Rsis or princes who have adopted
a life of devotion, as Visvamitra; divine Rsis
or sages who are demigods also, as Narada;
and Brahmana Rsis or sage who are the sons
of Brahma or Brahmanas as Vasistha and
others.*

इति शाखा: प्रसंख्याता: शाखाभेदास्तथैव च।
asa शाखानां भेदहेतुस्तथोदित:॥ ३ VN
सर्वमन्वन्तरेष्वेव MGA: Wat: स्मृत:।
प्राजापत्या श्रुतिर्नित्या तद्विकल्पास्त्विमे द्विज।। ३ २॥

I have thus described to you the branches
of the Vedas and their subdivisions; the
persons by whom they were made; and the
reason why they were made (or the limited
capacities of mankind). The same branches are

instituted in the different Manvantaras. The
primitive Veda, that of the progenitor of all
things, is eternal; these branches are but its
modifications (or Vikalpas).

एतत् तवोदितं ad यत् पृष्टोऽहमिह त्वया।
भैत्रेय! भेदसम्बद्धं किमन्यत् कथयामि ते।। ३ ३॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे षष्ठोऽध्याय:॥६॥

I have thus related to you, Maitreya, the
circumstances relating to the Vedas, which
you desired to hear. Of what else do you wish
to be informed’?

kak
NOTES

1, The Vayu makes Sukarman the grandson of
Sumantu, his son being called Sunvat.

2. Some copies read Pauspini. The Vayu agrees
with our text, but alludes to a legend of Sukarman
having first taught a thousand disciples, but they
were all killed by Indra, for reading on an unlawful
day or one when sacred study is prohibited.

3. The Vayu specifies many more names than the
Visnu, but the list is rather confused. Amongst the
descendants of those named in the text, Rayananiya
(or Rand4yantya), the son of Lokaksi, is the author
of a Sarhita still extant ; Saumitri his son was the
author of three Sambhitds; Parasara, the son of
Kauthumi, compiled and taught six Sathhitas, and
Saligotra, a son of Largali, established also six
schools. Krti was of royal descent : हिरण्यनाभस्य कृति:
शिष्य नृपात्मज:। he and Pausyini were the two most
eminent teachers of the Samaveda.

4. According to the commentator, Muiijakesa is
another name for Babhru; but the Vayu seems to
consider him as the pupil of Saindhava, but the text
is corrupt : सैन्थवो मुंजके शाय (Frat चास्य द्विधा FA: ).

5. The Vayu has an enumeration of the verses
contained in the different Vedas, but it is very
indistinctly given in many respects, especially as
regards the Yajus. The Rk is said to comprise 8600
Reds. The Yajus, as originally compiled by Vy4sa,
12000 : of which the VAjasneyi contains 1900 Rcas
and 7600 Brahmanas; the Caraka portion contains
6026 stanzas and consequently the whole exceeds
12000 verses. The stanzas of the Saman are said to
be 8014; and those of the Atharvan 5980.
Colebrooke states the verses of the whole Yajus to
