BOOK IV, 11

यदोर्वंशं नर: श्रुत्वा सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते।
यत्रावतीर्णं विष्णुवाख्यं परं ब्रह्म निराकृति।। २॥

I will first relate to you the family of Yadu,
the eldest son of Yayati, in which the eternal
immutable Visnu descended upon earth in a
portion of his essence;' of which the glory
cannot be described, though forever hymned in
order to confer the fruit of all their
wishes—whether they desired virtue, wealth,
pleasure or liberation—upon all created beings,
upon men, saints, heavenly quiristers, spirits
of evil, nymphs, centaurs, serpents, birds,
demons, gods, sages, Brahmanas and ascetics.
Whoever hears the account of the race of Yadu
shall be released from all sin; for the supreme
spirit, that is without form and which is called
Visnu, was manifested in this family.

सहस्रजित्-क्रोष्टु-नल-रघुसंज्ञाश्चत्वारो यदुपुत्रा बभूवु:।
सहस्रजित् पुत्र: शतजित्। wa हैहयवेणुहयास्त्रय: पुत्रा
बभूवु:। हैहयाद् धर्म्मनेत्र:, तत: कुन्ति:, HA: साहञ्जि:)
तत्तनयो महिष्मान्, तस्माद् भद्रश्रेण्य: ततो दुर्द्दम:, तस्माद्

दशयज्ञसहस्राण्यसावयजत्। तस्य as श्लोकोऽद्यापि
गीयते॥ ३॥।
नूनं न कार्त्तवीर्य्यस्य गतिं यास्यन्ति पारथिवा:।

यज्ञैर्दानैस्तपोभिर्वा प्रश्रयेण दमेन च।।४॥
अनष्टद्रव्यता च तस्य राज्येऽभवत्॥ ५॥

एवं पञ्चाशीतिसहस्राण्यब्दानव्याहतारोग्यश्रीबलपराक्रमो
राज्यमकरोत्। माहिष्मत्यां दिग्विजयाभ्यागतो नर्मदा-
जलावगाहनक्रीडानिपानमदाकुलेनायत्नेनैव तेनाशेषदेवदैत्य-
गन्धर्वेशजयोद्भूतमदावलेपोऽपि रावण: पशुरिव बद्धा
स्वनगरैकान्ते स्थापित:।।६॥

Yadu had four sons, Sahasrajit, Krosti,
Nala and Raghu.’ Satajit was the son of the
elder of these and he had three sons, Haihaya,

353

Venu’ and Haya. The son of Haihaya was
Dharmanetra’*; his son was Kunti>; his son was
Sahanji°; his son was Mahismat’; his son was
Bhadrasena®; his son was Durddama; his son
was Dhanaka’, who had four sons, Krtavirya,
Krtagni, Krtavarman and Krtaujas. Krtavirya's
son was Arjuna, the sovereign of the seven
Dvipas, the lord of a thousand arms. This
prince propitiated the sage Dattatreya, the
descendant of Atri, who was a portion of Vis
nu and solicited and obtained from him these
boons— a thousand arms; never acting unjustly;
subjugation of the world by justice and
protecting it equitably; victory over his
enemies; and death by the hands of a person
renowned in the three regions of the universe.
With these means he ruled over the whole
earth with might and justice and offered ten
thousand sacrifices. Of him this verse is still
recited : "The kings of the earth will assuredly
never pursue his steps in sacrifice, in
munificence, in devotion, in courtesy and in
self-control." In his reign nothing was lost or
injured; and so he governed the whole earth
with undiminished health, prosperity, power

. and might, for eighty-five thousand years.

While sporting in the waters of the Narmada
and elevated with wine, Ravana came on his
tour of triumph to the city Mahismati and
there he who boasted of overthrowing the
gods, the Daityas, the Gandharvas and their
king, was taken prisoner by K4rttavirya and
confined like a tame beast in a comer of his

capital.'°
a: पञ्चाशीतिवर्षसहस्रोपलक्षणकालावसाने
भगवन्नारायणांशेन परशुरामेण उपसंहृत:। तस्य

पुत्रशतप्रधाना: पञ्च पुत्रा बभूवु:) शूर-शूरसेनवृषण-
मधुध्वजसंज्ञा:। जयध्वजात् तालजङ्घ: पुत्रोऽभवत्।
तालजङ्घस्य पुत्रशतमासीत्। येषां ज्येष्ठो वीतिहोत्र:, तथान्यो
भरत:, भरताद् वृष-सुजातौ च। वृषस्य पुत्रो मधुरभवत्।
तस्यापि वृष्णिप्रमुखं पुत्रशतमासीत्। यतो वृष्णिसंज्ञामेतद्
गोत्रमवाप। मधुसंज्ञाहेतुश्च मधुरभवत् यादवाश्च
यदुनामोपलक्षणात्॥७॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे एकादश: अध्याय:।।
