70

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Gee: सत्यमाहेदं स्वल्पभाग्योऽसि पुत्रक।

न हि पुण्यवतां वत्स सपत्नैरेवमुच्यते।। १६॥

नोद्वेगस्तात कर्त्तव्य: कृतं AE भवता पुरा।

तत् कोऽपहर्ततुं शक्नोति दातुं कश्चाकृतं त्वया। get

राजासनं त्तथाच्छत्रं ATT वरवारणा:।

यस्य पुण्यानि तस्यैते मत्वैतच्छाम्य TAH १८॥

अन्यजन्मक्रृतै: पुण्यै: सुरुच्यां सुरुचिर्नृप:।

भार्येति प्रोच्यते चान्या मद्दिधा भाग्यवर्जिता।। १९॥

पुण्योपचयसम्पन्नस्तस्या: पुत्रस्तथोत्तम:।

मम पुत्रस्तथा जात: स्वल्पपुण्यो ध्रुवो भवान्।॥ २०॥

तथापि दु:खं न भवान् कर्तुमर्हति पुत्रक।

यस्य यावत् स तेनैव स्वेन तुष्यति बुद्धिमान्॥ २१॥

यदि वा दु:खमत्यर्थं सुरुच्या वचसा तव।

तत् पुण्योपचये यत्नं HE सर्वफलप्रदे।। २२॥

सुशीलो wa धर्मात्मा ta: प्राणिहिते रत:।

निम्नं यथाप: प्रवणा: पात्रमायान्ति सम्पद:।। २३॥

Suniti said— “Suruci has rightly spoken;
thine, child, is an unhappy fate: those who are
born to fortune are not liable to the insults of
their rivals. Yet be not afflicted, my child, for
who shall effact what you have formerly done,
or shall assign to you what you have left
undone? The regal throne, the umbrella of
royalty, horses and elephants, are his whose
virtues have deserved them: remember this.
my son, and be consoled. That the king
favours Suruci is the reward of her merits in a
former existence. The name of wife alone
belongs to such as I. who have not equal merit.
Her son is the progeny of accumulated piety,
and is born as Uttama: mine has been born as
Dhruva, of inferior moral worth. Therefore,
my son. it is not propcr for you to grieve; a
wise man will be contented with that degree
which appertains to him: but if you continue to
feel hurt at the words of Suruci. endeavour to
augment due religious merit which bestows all
good; be amiable, be pious, be friendly. be
assiduous in benevolence to all living
creatures; for prosperity descends upon

modest worth as water Rows towards low
ground.”

ga उवाच
अम्ब यत् त्वमिदं प्राह प्रशमाय वचो मम। .
नैतद् दुर्वचसा भिन्ने हृदये मम तिष्ठति।। २४॥
सोऽहं तथा यतिष्यामि तथा सर्वोत्तमोत्तमम्।
स्थानं प्राप्स्याम्यशेषाणां जगतामपि पूजितम्। २५॥
सुरुचिर्दयिता राज्ञस्तस्या जातोऽस्मि नोदरात्।
प्रभावं पश्य मेऽम्ब त्वं Genie wat २६॥
उत्तम: स मम भ्राता यो गर्भे न धृतस्त्वया।

स राजासनमाप्नोतु पित्रा दत्तं तथास्तु ATU २७॥
नान्यदत्तमभीप्सामि स्थानमम्ब स्वकर्मणा।
इच्छामि तदहं स्थानं यन्न प्राप पिता मम।। २८॥

Dhruva answered: “Mother, the words that
you have addressed to me for my consolation
find no place in a heart tnat contumely has
broken. I will exert myself to obtain such
elevated rank, that it shall be revered by the
whole world. Though I be not born of Suruci,
the beloved of the king, you shall behold my
glory, who am your son. Let Uttama my
brother, her child, possess the throne given to
him by my father; I wish for no other honours
than such as my own actions shall acquire,
such as even my father has not enjoyed.”

WU Sara

निर्जगाम गृहान्मातुरित्युक्त्वा मातरं ध्रुव:।

पुराच्च निष्क्रम्य ततस्तदू बाह्योपवनं ययौ।। २९॥

स test मुनींस्तत्र सप्त पुर्वागतान् ध्रुव:।

कृष्णाजिनोत्तरीयेषु विष्टरेषु समास्थितान्।३०॥

स राजपुत्रस्थान् सर्वान् प्रणिपत्याभ्यभाषत।

प्रश्रयावनत: सम्यगभिवादनपूर्वकम्।। ३ १॥

Paraiara continued~ Having thus spoken,
Dhruva went forth from his mother's dwelling:
he quitted the city, and entered an adjoining
thicket, where he beheld seven Munis sitting
upon hides of the black antelope, which they

had taken from off their persons, and spread
over the holy kusa grass. Saluting them
