BOOK Ill, CHAP. इ

वैशम्पायन एकस्तु तं व्यतिक्रान्तवांस्तदा।
स्वस्रीयं बालकं सोऽथ पदास्पृष्टमघातयत्।। ५॥
शिष्यानाह स भो: fren! ब्रह्महत्यापहं व्रतम्।
चरध्वं मत्कृते सर्वे न विचार्यमिदं तथा॥६॥
अथाह याज्ञवल्क्यस्तु किमेभिर्भगवन्। द्विजै:।
क्लेशितैरल्पतेजोभिश्चरिष्येऽहमिदं व्रतम्॥७॥
तत: क्रुद्धो गुस: We याज्ञवल्क्यं महामति:।
मुच्यतां यत् त्वयाधीतं मत्तो विप्रावमानक।। ८॥

निस्तेजसो वदस्येनान् wed ब्राह्मणपुङ्गवान्।
aa शिष्येण नार्थोऽस्ति ममाज्ञाभङ्गकारिणा।। ९॥

Vaisampayana alone failed to keep the
appointment and consequently killed, by an
accidental kick with his foot, the child of his
sister. He then addressed his scholars and
desired them to perform the penance expiatory
of Brahmanicide on his behalf. Without any
hesitation Yajfiavalkya refused and said, "How
shall I engage in penance with these miserable
and incfficient Brahmanas?" On which his
Guru, being incensed, commanded him to
rclinquish all that he had learnt from him.
"You spcak contemptuously," he observed "of
these young Brahmanas, but of what use is a
disciple who disobeys my commands?"

याज्ञवल्क्यस्तत: Ws भक्त्यैतत्ते मयोदितम्।
ममाप्यलं त्वयाधीतं यन्मया तदिदं द्विज।। gon
पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्तो रुधिराक्तानि सरूपाणि यजूंषि स:।
छर्दयित्वा ददौ तस्मै ययौ स स्वेच्छया मुनि:।। ११॥
यजूंष्यथ विसृष्टानि याज्ञवल्क्येन वै द्विज!
जगूहुस्तित्तिरा year तैत्तिरीयास्तु ते तत:। १२॥
ब्रह्महत्याव्रतं चीर्णं गुरुणा चोदितैस्तु यै:।
चरकाध्वर्यवस्ते तु चरणान्मुनिसत्तम।। १३॥

"I spoke," replied Yajfiavalkya, "in perfect
faith; but as to what I have read from you, I
have had enough : it is no more than this—"
(acting as if he would eject it from his

stomach); when he brought up the texts of the
Yajus in substance stained with blood. He then

{ dcparted. The other scholars of Vaisampayana,

239

transforming themselves to partridges (Tittir),
picked up the texts which he had disgorged
and which from that circumstance were called
Taittiriya;’ and the disciples were called the
Caraka professors the Yajus, from Carana,
‘going through’ or 'performing'’ the expiatory
rites enjoined by their master.’

याज्ञवल्क्योऽपि मैत्रेय! प्राणायामपरायण:।
तुष्टाव प्रयत: सूर्यं यजूष्यभिलषंस्तत:।। १४॥

Yajfiavalkya, who was perfect in ascetic
practices, addressed himself strenuously to the
sun, being anxious to recover possession of the
texts of the Yajus.

साज्ञवल्क्य उवाच

नम: सवित्रे द्वाराय fark: सिततेजसे।

ॠग्यजु:सामभूताय त्रयीधामवते नम:।। १५॥

नमोऽग्नीषोमभूताय जगत: कारणात्मने।

भास्कराय परं तेज: सौषुम्नमुरु बिभ्रते।। १६॥॥

कलाकाष्ठानिमेषादिकालज्ञानात्मने नम:।

ध्येयाय विष्णुरूपाय परमाक्षररूपिणे।। १७॥

बिभत्ति a: सुरगणानाप्याय्येन्दुं स्वरश्मिभि:।

सुधामृतेन च पितृस्तस्मै तृप्तात्मने नम:।। १८॥

हिमाम्बुघर्मवृष्टीनां कर्ता हर्ता च य: प्रभु:।

तस्मै त्रिकालरूपाय नम: Wate वेधसे।। ee

यो हन्ति तिमिराण्येको जगतोऽस्य जगत्पति:।

सत्त्वधामधरो देवो नमस्तस्मै विवस्वते।। ou

Yajfiavalkya exclaimed~ "Glory to the sun,
who is the gate of liberation, the fountain of
bright radiance, the triple source of splendour,
as the Rk, the Yajur and the Samaveda. Glory
to him, who, as fire and the moon, is one with
the cause of the universe; to the sun, that is
charged with radiant heat and with the Sus
umna ray (by which the moon is fed with
light); to him who is one with the notion of
time and all its divisions of hours, minutes and
seconds; to him who is to be meditated upon
as the visible form of Visnu, as_ the
impersonation of the mystic Orb : to him who

nourishes the troops of the gods, having filled
the moon with his rays; who feeds the Pitrs
