३३8
नोर्वशीति। अथैनामटव्यामेवाग्निस्थालीं तत्याज
स्वपुरञ्चाजगाम।।४१॥

व्यतीतार्द्धरात्रौ विनिद्रश्चाचिन्तयत्, ममोर्वशीसालोक्य-
प्राप्त्यर्थमग्निस्थाली गन्धव्वैर्दत्ता सा च मया sect
परित्यक्ता तदहं at तदाहरणाय यास्यामि इत्युत्थाय
तत्राप्युपगतो नाग्निस्थालीमषश्यत्। शमीगर्भञ्चाश्वत्थमस्नि-
स्थालीस्थाने दृष्टवा अचिन्तयत्-मयात्र स्थालीं निक्षिप्ता, सा
ae: शमीगर्भोऽभूत् तदेतमेवाहमग्निरूपमादाय
स्वपुरमभिगम्य at कृत्वा तदुत्पन्नाग्नेरुपास्ति
करिष्यामीति।। ४ २॥

When the year had expired, Urvasi and the
monarch met at Kuruksetra and she consigned
to him his first-born Ayus; and these annual
interviews were repeated, until she had borne
to him five sons. She then said to Purtravas,
"Through regard for me, all the Gandharvas
have expressed their joint purpose to bestow
upon my lord their benediction : let him
therefore demand a boon." The R4ja replied,
"My enemies are all destroyed, my faculties
are all entire; I have fricnds and kindred,
armies and treasures : there is nothing which I
may not obtain except living in the same
region with my Urvasi. My only desire
therefore is, to pass my life with her." When
he had thus spoken, the Gandharvas brought to
Purtiravas a vessel with fire and said to him,
"Take this fire and according to the precepts of
the Vedas, divide it into three fires; then fixing
your mind upon the idea of living with Urvasi,
offer oblations and you shall assuredly obtain
your wishes." The Raja took the brasier and
departed and came to a forest. Then he began
to reflect that he had committed a great folly
in bringing away the vessel of fire instead of
his bride; and leaving the vessel in the wood,
he went disconsolate to his palace. In the
middle of the night he awoke and considered
that the Gandharvas had given him the brasier
to enable him to obtain the felicity of living
with Urvasi and that it was absurd in him to
have Icft it by thc way. Resolving therefore to
recover it, he rose and went to the place where

THE VISNU-PURANAM

he had deposited the vessel; but it was gone. In
its stead he saw a young Asvattha tree growing
out of a Sami plant and he reasoned with
himself and said, "I left in this spot a vessel of
fire and now behold a young Asvattha tree
growing out of a Sami plant. Verily I will take
these types of fire to my capital and there,
having engendered fire by their attrition, I will
worship it."

एवमेव स्वपुरमुपगतोऽरणीं चकार।।४३॥

बहुविधान् यज्ञान् इष्टा गन्धर्वलोकान् wer उर्व्वश्या we

वियोगं नावाप।।४५॥

एकोऽग्निरादावभवत् tar wa want त्रेता
प्रविर्तिता।।४६॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे agaist षष्ठ: अध्याय:।

Having thus determined, he took the plants
to his city and prepared their wood for
attrition, with pieces of as many inches long as
there are syllables in the Gayatri : he recited
that holy verse and rubbed together sticks of as
many inches as he recited syllables in the
Gayatri.” Having thence elicited fire, he made
it threefold, according to the injunctions of the
Vedas and offered oblations with it, proposing
as the end of the ceremony reunion with
Urvasi. In this way, celebrating many
sacrifices agreeably to the form in which
offerings are presented with fire, Purdravas
obtained a seat in the sphere of the
Gandharvas and was no more separated from
his beloved. Thus fire, that was at first but one,
was made threefold in the present Manvantara
by the son of [1a.°
NOTES

1. The Vayu says the essence of Soma (Somatva)
issued from the eyes of Atri and impregnated the
ten quarters. The Bhagavata says merely that Soma
was born from the eyes of Atri. The Brahma Purana
