BOOK I, CHAP. 1

143

sovereignty of the earth to the heroic Bharata,
and, retiring to the hermitage of Pulastya,
adopted the life of an anchoret, practising re-
ligious penance, and performing all prescribed
ceremonies, until, emaciated by his austerities,
so as to be but a collection of skin and fibres.
he put a pepple in his mouth, and naked went
the way of all flesh.” The country was termed
Bharata from the time that it was relinquished
to Bharata by his father, on his retiring to the
woods.®

सुमतिर्भरतस्याभूत् ya: परमधार्मिक:॥३३॥
कृत्वा सम्यग् ददौ तस्मै राज्यमिष्टमख: पिता।
पुत्रसङ्कामितश्रीस्तु भरत: स महीपति:।॥ ३४॥
योगाभ्यासरत: प्राणान् शालग्रामेऽत्यजन्मुने!
अजायत च विप्रोऽसौ योगिनां wat wet ३५॥
मैत्रेय! wer चरितं कथयिष्यामि ते पुन:।

Bharata, having religiously discharged the
duties of his station, consigned the kingdom to
his son Sumati, a most virtuous prince; and,
engaging in devout practices, abandoned his
life at the holy place, Sdlagrama: he was
afterwards born again as a Brahmana, in a
distinguished family of ascetics. 1 shall
hereafter relate to you his history.

सुमतेस्तेजसस्तस्मादिन्द्रद्युम्नो व्यजायत।। ३ ६॥
परमेष्ठी ततस्तस्मात् प्रतिहारस्तदन्वय:।

प्रतिहर्ततेति विख्यात उत्पन्नस्तस्य चात्मज:॥ ३७॥
पृथुस्ततोऽभवन्नक्तो नक्तस्यापि राय: YTB CH
नरो गयस्य तनयस्तत्पुत्रोऽभूद् विराट् तत:।

wer पुत्रो महावीर्यो धीमांस्तस्मादजायत।।३९॥
भहान्तस्तत्सुतश्लाभून्मनस्युस्तस्य चात्मज:।

त्वष्टा त्वष्टुश्च विरजो रजस्तस्याप्यभूत् सुत:।। ४०॥
शतजिद्रजसस्तस्य जज्ञे पुत्रशतं मुने।

विश्वग्ज्योति: प्रधानास्ते यैरिमां वद्धिता: प्रजा:।। et
तेषां वंशप्रसूतैश्च भुक्तेयं भारती TTY
कृतत्रेतादिसर्गेण युगाख्या ह्येकसप्तति:॥४३॥

From the illustrious Sumati was born
Indradyumna: his son was Paramesthin: his
son was Pratihdra, who had a celebrated son,
named Pratihartta: his son was Bhava, who
begot Udgitha, who begot Prast&éra; whose son
was Prithu. The son of Prithu was Nakta: his
son was Gaya: his son was Nara; whose son
was Virat. The valiant son of Virdt was
Dhimat, who begot Mahanta; whose son was
Manasyu; whose son was Twasta: his son was
Viraja: his son was Raja: his son was Satajit,
who had a hundred sons, .of whom
Visvagjyotis was the eldest.” Under these
princes, Bharata-varsa (India) was divided into
nine portions (to be hereafter particularised);
and their descendants successively held
possession of the country for seventy-one
periods of the aggregate of the four ages (or
for the reign of a Manu).

एष स्वायम्भुव: सर्गो येनेदं पूरितं जगत्।
वाराहे तु मुने! कल्पे पूर्वमन्वन्तराधिप:।। ४४॥

This was the creation of Svayambhuva
Manu. by which the earth was peopled, when
he presided over the first Manvantara, in the
Kalpa of Varaha."°

NOTES

1. The text reads Kanya (कर्दमस्यात्मजां कन्यां); and
the commentator has, ‘he married the daughter of
Kardama. whose name was Kanya, (#7
कन्यासंज्ञामिति). The copies agree in the reading, and
the Vayu has the same name’ Kanya; but the
Markandeya, which is the same in other respects as
our text, has Kamya: Kamyéa also is the name else,
where given by the Vd4yu to the daughter of
Kardama (Ch. X. n. 6). Kamya, as has been
noticed, appears in the Brahma and Hari V. (Ch.
VIL n. 6) as the mother of Priyavrata, but
erroneously : and the same authorities specify a
Kamya as the wife of that sovereign. So the com-
mentator on the Hari V. states, 'another Kamya is
mentioned (in the text), the daughter of Kardama,
the wife of Priyavrata:” प्रियव्रतस्य भार्या कर्द्दमपुत्री
काम्यान्येत्याह। The name Kanya is therefore most
probably an error of the copyists. The Bhagavata
