३52

NOTES

1. The Bhagavata refers briefly to the story of
Nahusa which is told in the Mahabharata more than
once, in the Vana Parva, Udyoga Parva, Dana
Dharma Parva and others; also in the Padma and
other Purinas. He had obtained the rank of Indra;
but in his pride or at the suggestion of Saci,
compelling the Rsis to bear his litter, he was cursed
by them to fall from his state and reappear upon
earth as a serpent. From this form he was set free
by philosophical discussions with Yudhisthira and
received final liberation. Much speculation, wholly
unfounded, has been started by Wilford's conjecture
that the name of this prince, with Deva, ‘divine’,
prefixed, a combination which never occurs, was
the same as Dionysius or Bacchus. Authorities
generally agree as to the names of the first three of
his sons : in those of the others there is much
variety and the Matsya, Agni and Padma have
seven names, as follows omitting the three first of
the text ;

Matsya Agni Padma Litiga
Udbhava  Udbhava Udbhava Saryati
Pansci Paficaka Pava Caimpaka
Sunyati Palaka Viyati Andhaka
Meghayati Megha Meghayati

2. Or, as his name implies (aa), he became a
devotee, a Yati : Bhagavata.

3. The story is told in great detail in the Adi
Parvan of the Mahabharata, also in the Bhagavata,
with some additions evidently of a recent taste.
Sarmistha, the daughter of 'Vrsaparvan, king of the
Daityas, preceptor of the same race), had her
thrown into a well. Yayati, hunting in the forest,
found her and taking her to her father, with his
consent espoused her. Devayani, in resentment of
Sarmistha's treatment, demanded that she should
become her handmaid; and Vrsaparvan, afraid of
Sukra's displeasure, was compelled to comply. In
the service of his queen, however, Yayati beheld
Sarmistha and secretly wedded her. Devayani
complaining to her father of Yayati's infidelity,
Sukra inflicted on him premature decay, with
permission to transfer it to any one willing to give
him youth and strength in exchange, as is related in
the text. The passage specifying the sons of Yayati
is precisely the same in the Mahabharata as in our
text and is introduced in the same way

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अत्रानुवंशश्लोको भवति। यदुं चतुर्वसं चैव देवयानी व्याजायत। Sa
चानुं पुरुं च शम्मिंष्ठा वार्षपर्णी।

4. Bhrgutunga, according to the Brahma.

5. The elder brothers were made Mandala-nrpas,
kings of circles or districts : Bhagavata. The
situation of their governments is not exactly agreed
upon.

Vayu and Brahmaand Bhagavata
Padma Hari Varhsa
Turvasu South-east South-east West
Druhyu West West South-east
Yadu South-west South South
Anu North North North

The Linga describes the ministers and people as
expostulating with Yayati, for illegally giving the
supremacy to the youngest son; but he satisfies
them by showing that he was justified in setting the
seniors aside, for want of filial duty. The
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva Galava Caritra, has a
legend of Yayati's giving a daughter to the saint
Gialava, who through her means obtains from
different princes cight hundred horses, white with
one black ear, as a fee for his preceptor Visvamitra.
Yayati, after his death and residence in Indra's
heaven, is again descending to earth, when his
daughter's sons give him the benefit of their
devotions and replace him in the celestial sphere. It
has the air of an old story. A legend in some
respects similar has been related in our text, Bk. IV,
Ch. VIE.

kik
