96

THE VISNU-PURANAM

region of Visnu termed Purusottama where,
Maitterya’ with his whole mind he devoted
himself to the adoration of Hari; standing
fixed, with uplifted arms, and repeating the
prayers that comprehend the essence of divine
truth.’

प्रचेतस ऊचु:

ब्रह्मपारं मुने: श्रोतुमिच्छाम: परमं स्तवम्।

जपता कण्डुना Say येनाराध्यत केशव:॥ ५४॥

The Pracetasas said, “We are desirous to
hear the transcendental prayers by inaudibly
reciting which the pious Kandu propitiated
Kesava.”

सोम उवाच
पारं परं विष्णुपारापार:
पर: परेभ्य: परमार्थरूपी।
स ब्रह्मपार: परपारभूत:
पर: पराणामपि पारपार:।॥ ५५॥
स कारणं कारणतस्ततोऽपि
कार्येषु dd सह कर्मकर्तृ-
स्तपैरशेषैरवतीह Wa ५६॥
TE प्रभुर्ब्रह्म स सर्वभूतो
Ta प्रजानां पतिरच्युतोऽसौ।
ब्रह्माक्षरं नित्यमजं स विष्णु-
रपक्षयाद्यैरखिलैरसङ्घि।। ५७॥

ब्रह्माक्षरमजं नित्यं यथाऽसौ पुरुषोत्तम:।

तथा रागादयो दोषा: WAT प्रशमं मन:।।५८॥

On which Soma repeated as follows:
“Visnu is beyond the boundary of all things:
he is the infinite: he is beyond that which is
boundless: he is above all that is above: he
cxists as finite truth: he is the object of the
Veda; the limit of elemental being;
unappreciable by the senses; possessed of
illimitable might: he is the cause of cause; the
cause of the cause of cause; the cause of finite
cause, and in effects, he both as every object

and agent, preserves the universe: he is
Brahmd the lord; Brahma all beings; Brahma

the progenitor of all beings; the imperishable:
he is the eternal, undecaying, unborn Brahma,
incapable of increases or diminution:
Purusottama is the everlasting, uncreated,
immutable Brahma. May the imperfections of
my nature be annihilated through his favour.’

सोम sara
Wid ब्रह्मा पराख्यं वै संस्तवं परमं जपन्।
अवाप परमां सिद्धिं समाराध्य स AMAT ५९॥
sae मारिषा पूर्वमासीद् या at ब्रवीमि व:।
कार्यगौरवमेतस्या: कथने फलदायि व:।। ६०॥
अपुत्रा प्रागियं विष्णुं मृते raft सत्तमा:।
भूपपत्नी महाभागा तोषयामास भक्तित:।। ६ १॥
आराधितस्तया विष्णु: प्राह प्रत्यक्षतां गत:।
at वृणीष्वेति शुभा सा च प्राहात्मवाञ्छितम्।। ६ २॥
भगवन् बालवैधव्याद् वृथाजन्माहमीदृशी।
मन्दभाग्या समुत्पन्ना विफला च जगत्पते।। ६ ३॥
भवन्तु पतय: श्लाघ्या मम जन्मनि जन्मनि।
AAT FM YR: प्रजापतिसमोऽस्तु AG vi
रूपसम्पत्समायुक्ता सर्वस्य प्रियदर्शना।
अयोनिजा च जायेयं त्वत्प्रसादादधोक्षज।। ६५॥

Soma siad— Reciting this eulogium, the
essence of divine truth, and propitiating
Kesava, Kandu obtained final emancipation.
“Who Marisha was of old I will also relate to
you, as the recital of her meritorious acts will
be beneficial to you. She was the widow of a
prince, and left childless at her husband's
death: she therefore zealously worshipped Vis
nu who, being gratified by her adoration,
appeared to her, and desired her to dcmand a
boon, on which she revealed to him the wishes
of her heart. ‘I have been a widon, lord,’ she
exclaimed, ‘even from my infancy, and my
birth has been in vain: unfortunate have I been
and of little use, oh sovereign of the world.
Now therefore I pray you that in succeeding
births I may have honourable husbands, and a
son equal to a patriarch amongst men: may I
be possessed of affluence and beauty: may I be
pleasing in the sight of all: and may I be born
