BOOK V, CHAP. 27

HRCA सुघोरे मकरालये।। ३॥
पतितं तत्र चैवैको मत्स्यो जग्राह बालकम्।

न ममार च तस्यापि जठरेऽनलदीपित:॥ ४॥
मत्स्यबन्धैश्च मत्स्योऽसौ मत्स्यैरन्यै: सह द्विज।
घातितोऽसुरवर्य्यय शम्बराय निवेदित:।। ५॥

ParaSara replied—When Pradyumna was but
six days old, he was stolen from the lying-in
chamber by Sambara, terrible as death; for the
demon foreknew that Pradyumna, if he lived,
would be his destroyer. Taking away the boy,
Sambara cast him into the ocean, swarming
with monsters, into a whirlpool of roaring
waves, the haunt of the huge creatures of the
deep. A large fish swallowed the child, but he
died not, and was born anew from its belly:’
for that fish, with others, was caught by the
fishermen, and delivered by them to the great
Asura Sambara.

TET मायावती AT पत्नी सर्वगृहेश्वरो।

कारयामास सूदानामाधिपत्यमनिन्दिता।। ६॥
दारिति मत्स्यजठरे सा ददर्शातिशोभनम्।

कुमारं मन्मथतरोर्दग्धस्य प्रथमाङ्कुरम्॥७॥
कोऽयं कथमयं मत्स्यजठरं समुपागत:।

इत्येव कौतुकाविष्टां at तन्वीं प्राह नारद: ॥८॥
अयं समस्तजगत: सूतिसंहारकारिणा।

शम्बरेण FA: कृष्ण-तनयं सूतिकागृहात्।। ९॥
faa: समुद्रे मत्स्येन निगीर्णस्ते agi गत:।
नररत्नमिदं सुभ्रू विस्रब्धा परिपालय 11 १०॥

His wife Mayadevi, the mistress of his
household, superintended the operations of the
cooks, and saw, when the fish was cut open, a
beautiful child, looking like a new shoot of the
blighted tree of love. Whilst wondering who
this should be, and how be could have got into
the belly of the fish, Narada came to satisfy
her curiosity, and said to the graceful dame,
“This is the son of him by whom the whole
world is created and destroyed, the son of Vis
nu, who was stolen by Sambara from the
lying-in chamber, and tossed by him into the

487

sea, where he was swallowed by the fish. He is
now in thy power; do you, beautiful woman,
tenderly rear this jewel of mankind."

पराशर उवाच

नारदेनैवमुक्ता सा पालयामास तं शिशुम्।
बाल्यादेवातिरागेण रूपातिशयमोहिता।। ११॥
स यदा यौवनाभोग-भूषितोऽभून्महामते।
साभिलाषा तदा साति बभूव गजगामिनी।। १२॥
भायावती ददौ तस्मै माया: सर्वा महामुने।
प्रद्युम्नायातिरागान्धा तन्न्यस्तहृदयेक्षणा॥ १३॥

Thus counselled by Narada, Mayadevi took
charge of the boy, and carefully reared him
from childhood, being fascinated by the
beauty of his person. Her affection became
still more impassioned when he was decorated
with the bloom of adolescence. The
gracefully-moving Mayavati then, fixing her
heart and eyes upon the high-minded
Pradyumna, gave him, whom she regarded as
herself, all her magic (and illusive) powers.

प्रसज्जन्तीन्तु तामाह स afer: कमलेक्षणाम्।
`भातृभावमपाहाय किमेवं वर्त्तसेऽन्यथा ॥ १४॥

सा चास्मै कथयामास न पुत्रस्त्वं ममेति वै।

तनयं त्वामयं विष्णोर्हृतवान् कालशम्बर:।। १५॥
क्षिप्त: समुद्रे मत्तस्यस्य सम्प्राप्तो जठरान्मया।

सा तु रोदिति ते माता कान्ताद्याप्यतिवत्सला।। १६॥

Observing these marks of passionate
affection, the son of Krsna said to the lotus-
eyed Mayadevi, "Why do you indulge in
feelings so unbecoming the character of a
mother? ' To which she replied, “You are not a
son of mine; you are the son of Visnu, whom
Kala Sambara carried away, and threw into the
sea: you was swallowed by a fish, but was
rescued by me from its belly. Thy fond
mother, O beloved, is still weeping for you."

पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्त: शम्बरं युद्धे प्रद्युम्न: स समाह्वयत्।
क्रोधाकुलीक्रृतमना युयुधे च महाबल: ॥ १७॥
