BOOK I, CHAP. 9

55

याचिता तेन तन्वङ्गी मालां विद्याधराङ्गना।
ददौ तस्मै विशालाक्षी सादरं प्रणिपत्य च।।५॥
तामादायात्मनो मूष्नि स्रजमुन्मत्तरूपधृक्।
कृत्वा स विप्रो मैत्रय परिबभ्राम मेदिनीम्।॥६॥

स ददर्श समायान्तमुन्मत्तैरावतस्थितम्।

त्रैलोक्याधिपतिं देवं we दैवै: शचीपतिम्।।७॥

Durvasas, a portion of Sankara (Siva)', was
wandering over the earth; when he beheld, in
the hands of a nymph of air’, a garland of
flowers culled from the trees of heaven, the
fragrant. odour of which spread throughout the
forest, and enraptured all who dwelt beneath
its shade. The sage. who was then possessed
by religious frenzy’; when he beheld that
garland, demanded it of the graceful and full-
eyed nymph, who, bowing to him
reverentially, immediately presented it to him.
He, as one frantic, placed the choplet upon his
brow, and thus decorated resumed his path;
whcn he bcheld Indra, the husband of Saci. the
ruler of thc three worlds, approach, seated on
his infuriated elephant Airavata, and attended
by the gods.

तामात्मन: a: शिरस: स्रजमुन्मत्तट्पदाम्।
आदायामरराजाय चिक्षेपोन्मत्तवन्मुनि:।। ८॥
गृहीत्वामरराजेन स्रगैरावतमूर्द्धनि।

न्यस्ता रराज कैलासशिखरे जाह्नवी यथा।। ९॥
मदान्धकारिताक्षोऽसौ गन्धाकृष्टेन वारण:।
करेणाघ्राय चिक्षेप at aot धरणीतले॥ १०॥

The frenzied sage, taking from his head the
garland of flowers, amidst which the bees
collected ambrosia, threw it to the king of the
gods, who caught it. and suspended it on the
brow of Airavata, where it shone like the river
Jahnavi, glittering on the dark summit of the
mountain Kailaésa. The elephant, whose eyes
were dim with inebriety, and attracted by the
smell, took hold of the garland with his trunk,
and case it on the earth.

ततश्चुक्रोध भगवान् दुर्वासा मुनिसनत्तम:।
मैत्रेय देवराजं तं क्रुद्धश्चैतदुवाच ह।। ११॥

ऐश्रर्यमत्त दुष्टात्मन्नतिस्तव्धोऽसि वासव।

श्रियो धाम स्रजं wed महत्तां नाभिनन्दसि।। १२॥
Ware इति नोक्तं ते प्रणिषातपुर: सरम्।
हर्षोत्फुल्लकपोलेन न चापि शिरसा धृता।। १३॥
मया दत्तामिमां मालां यस्मान्न बहु मन्यसे।
त्रैलोक्यश्रीरतो मूढु विनाशमुपयास्यति।। १४॥
अतोऽवमानमस्माकं मानिना भवता FTTH १५॥
महत्ता भवता यस्मात् क्षिप्ता माला महीतले।
तस्मात् प्रनष्टलक्ष्मीकं त्रैलोक्यं ते भविष्यति।। १६॥
यस्य सञ्जातकोपस्य भयमेति चराचरम्।

तं त्वं मामतिगर्वेण देवराजावमन्यसे।। १७॥

That chief of sages, Durvasds, was highly
incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his
gilt, and thus angrily addressed the sovereign
of the immortals: “Inflated with the intoxica-
tion of power, Vasava, vile of spirit, you are
an idiot not to respect the garland I presented
to you, which was the dwelling of Fortune
(Sri), You have not acknowledged it as a
largess'; you have not bowed yourself before
me; you have not placed the wreath upon your
head, with your countenance expanding with
delight. Now, tool, for that you have not
infinitely prized the gailand that I gave you,
your sovereignty over the three worlds shall be
subverted. You confoundest me, Sakra, with
other Brahmanas. and hénce I have suffered
disrespect from your arrogance: but in like
manner as you have cast the garland I gave
you down on the ground, so shall your
dominion over the universe be whelmed in
ruin. You have offended one whose wrath is
dreaded by all created things, king of the gods.
even me, by thine excessive pride.”

षराशर FATT
महेन्द्रो वारणस्कन्धादवतीर्य्य त्वरान्वित:।
प्रसादयामास AAT दुर्वाससमकल्मषम्।। १८॥
प्रसाद्यमान: स तदा प्रणिपातपुर:सरम्।
प्रत्युवाच सहस्राक्षं दुर्वासा मुनिसत्तम:। १९॥
