324

THE VISNU-PURANAM

even shall obtain Svarga, whose bones, skin,
fibres, hair or any other part, shall be left after
death upon the earth which is contiguous to
the Ganges." Having acknowledged
reverentially the kindness of the sage,
Ansumat returned to his grandfather and
delivered to him the horse. Sagara, on
recovering the steed, completed his sacrifice;
and in affectionate memory of his sons,
denominated Sagara the chasm which they had
dug.* ।
तस्याप्यंशुमतो दिलीप: पुत्रोऽभवत्। दिलीपस्यापि
AAI १७॥

भगीरथात् श्रुत:, तस्यापि नाभाग: ततोऽप्यम्बरीष:,
तस्मात् सिन्धुद्बीप:) तस्याप्ययुताश्व:) a पुत्र ऋतुपर्णो
नलसहायोऽक्षहृदयज्ञोऽभूत्।। १८॥

a fiend of fearful figure and hideous aspect. Its
companion, threatening the prince with its
vengeance, disappeared.

कालेन गच्छता स सौदासो यज्ञमयजत्। परिनिष्ठितयज्ञे
चाचार्य्यवशिष्ठे निष्कान्ते तद्रक्षो वशिष्ठरूपमास्थाय
यथावसाने मम समांसं भोजनं देयम्, aq संष्कियतां
क्षणादिहागमिष्यामीत्युक्त्वा निष्कान्त:।। २५॥

न्यवेदयत्। असावपि हिरण्यपात्र स्थितं मांसमादाय
वशिष्ठागमनप्रतीक्षोऽभवत्॥ २६॥

आगताय च वशिष्ठाय निवेदितवान्, स चाचिन्तयत्,
अहो। राज्ञोऽस्य दौ:शील्यम् येनैतन्मांसमस्माकं प्रयच्छति।
किमेतद् द्रव्यजातमितिध्यानपरोऽभूत्,

अक्यच्छन्नपिभवान्मह्यददातितस्मात्तवैवात्रलोलुपा

ऋतुपर्ण-पुत्र: सर्वॆकाम:। तत्तनय: सुदास:। सुदासात् बुद्धिर्भविष्यतीति।२७॥

Mea मित्रसहनामा॥१९॥

The son of Ansumat was Dilipa’; his son
was Bhagiratha, who brought Ganga down to
earth, whence she is called Bhagirathi. Thc son
of Bhagiratha was Sruta®; his son was
Nabhaga’; his son was Ambarisa; his son was
Sindhudvipa; his son was Ayutagva*; his son
was Rituparna, the friend of Nala, skilled
profoundly i in dice®; the son of Rituparna was
Sarvakama'®. his son was Sudasa; his son was
Saudasa, nner also Mitrasaha.'!

. योऽसावटव्यां मृगयागतो व्याघ्रद्वयमपश्यत्॥ २०॥
ताभ्याञ्च AE वनमपमृगं कृतम्।। २ १॥
स चैकं तयोर्वाणेन जघान।। २ २॥

म्रियमाणश्चासावतिभीषणाकृतिरतिकरालवदनो
राक्षसोऽभवत्॥ २३॥

द्वितीयोऽपि प्रतिक्रिया ते करिष्यामीत्युक्तवान्तर्धानं
जगाम्॥ २४॥

The son of Sudasa having gone into the
woods to hunt, fell in with a couple of tigers,
by whom the forest had been cleared of the
deer. The king ‘slew one of these tigers with an
arrow. At the moment of expiring, the form of
the animal was changed and it became that of

After some interval Saudasa celebrated a
sacrifice, which was conducted by Vasistha.
At the close of the rite Vasistha went out;
when the Raksasa, the fellow of the one that
had been killed in the figure of a tiger,
assumed the semblance of Vasistha and came
and said to the king, "Now that the sacrifice is
ended, you must give me flesh to eat; let it be
cooked and I will presently return." Having
said this, he withdrew and transforming
himself into the shape of the cook, dressed
some human flesh, which he brought to the
king, who, receiving it on a plate of gold,
awaited the reappearance of Vasistha. As soon
as the Muni returned, the king offered to him
the dish. Vasistha surprised at such want.of
prosperity in the king, as his offering him meat
to eat, considered what it should be that was so
presented and by the efficacy of his meditation
discovered that it was human flesh. His mind
being agitated with wrath, he denounced a
curse upon the Raja, saying, "Inasmuch as you
have insulted all such holy men as we are, by
giving me what is not to be eaten, your
appetite shall henceforth be excited by similar
food."
