BOOK III, CHAP. 4

237

principal divisions of the Rk have been
promulgated”.

NOTES

1. According to the Grhya portion of the
Samaveda, there are five great sacrificial
ceremonies; 1. Agnihotra, burnt-offerings or
libations of clarified butter on sacred fire; 2.
Darsapaurnamasa, sacrifices at new and full moon;
3, Caturmasya, sacrifices every four months; 4.
Pasuyajiia or ASvamedha, sacrifice of a horse or
animal; and 5. Soma-yaifia, offering and libations
of the juice of the acid asclepias, These, again, are
either Prakrta, 'simple' or 'Vaikrta, ‘modified’, and
being thus doubled, constitute ten.

2. The composition of the Mahabharata is always
ascribed to the Vyasa named Krsna Dvaipayana,
the contemporary of the events there described. The
allusion in the text establishes the priority of the
poem to the Visnu Purana.

3. Or rather, ‘he took Paila as teacher’. The
expression is, Rgveda sravakam Pailam jagraha
(ॠग्वेदश्रावकं पैलं जग्राह), Srivaka means properly ‘he
who causes to hera', ‘a lacturer', ‘a preacher’;
although, as in the case of its applicablity to the
laity of the Buddhist and Jainas, it denotes a
disciple. The commentatory however observes, that
the text is sometimes read ऋग्वेदपारगं 'one who had
gone through the Rgveda'. So in the preceding
verse it is said, ‘he took four persons, well read in
the Vedas, as his disciples:' अथ शिष्यान् a जग्राह चतुरो
वेदपारगान्। and again it is said, ‘Sumantu, conversant
with the Atharvaveda, was his disciple:'
तथैवाथर्ववेदवित्। सुमन्तुस्तस्य शिष्योऽभूत्॥ It is clear,
therefore, that the Vedas were known, as distinct
works, before Krsna Dvaipayana; and it is difficult
to understand how he earned his title of arranger or
Vyasa; at any rate, in undertaking to give order to
the prayers and hymns of which the Vedas consist,
Paila and the others were rather his coadjutors than
disciples; and it scems probably that the first
establishment of a school, of which the Vyasa was
the head and the other persons named were the
teachers.

4. The Itihasa and Puranas; understanding by the
former, legendary and traditional narratives. It is
usually supposed that by the Itihadsa the
Mahabharata is especially meant; but although this
poem is ascribed to Krsna Dvaipayana, the

recitation of it is not attributed to his pupil, Roma
or Lomaharsana; it was first narrated by
Vaigampayana and after him by Sauti, the son of
Lomaharsana.

5. From this account, which is repeated in the
Vayu Purana, it appears that the original Veda was
the Yajus or in other words was a miscellaneous
body of precepts, formulae, prayers and hymns, for
sacrificial ceremonies; Yajus being derived by the
grammarians from Yaj (41), ‘to worship’. The
derivation of the Vayu Puréna, however, is from
Yuj., ‘to join’, 'to employ'; the formulae being those
especially applied to sacrificial rites or set apart for
that purpose from the general collection : aad च
यजुर्वेदॆ तेन यज्ञमथायुजत्। युंजान: wages sft शास्त्रविनिश्चय:॥
again, प्रयुज्यते ह्यश्वमेधस्तेन वा Bas तु Ai The
commentator on the text however, citing the former
of these passages from the Vayu, reads it, याजनाद्धि
यजुर्वेद इति शास्त्रस्य fis: contining the derivation to
Yaj, 'to worship’. The concluding passage, relating
to the Atharvan, refers in regard to regal
ceremonies, to those of expiation, Santi. The
function of the Brahmana (ब्रह्मत्वं यथास्थिति) is not
explained; but from the preceding specification of
the four orders of priests who repeat at sacrifice
portions of the several Vedas, it relates to the office
of the one that is termed specifically the Brahmana;
so the Vayu has वेदेनार्थर्वणेन a 'He
constituted the function of the Brahmana at
sacrifices with the Atharvaveda.

6. Both in our text and in that of the Vayu this
name occurs both Baskala and Baskali. Colebrooke
writes it Bahkala and Bahkati, As. Res., VIII. 374.

7. The Vayu supplies the detail Mandukeya or as
one copy writes, Markandeya, taught the Samhita
of his son Satyagrvas; he to his son Satyahita; and
he to his son Satyasri. The latter had three pupils,
Sakalya, also called Devamitra (sic in MS.),.
Rathantara and another Baskali, called also
Bharadvaja. The Vayu has a legend of Sakalya's
death, in consequence of his being defeated by
Yajfiavalkya in a disputation at a sacrifice
celebrated by Janaka.

8. These names in the Vayu are Mudgala,
Golaka, Khiliya, Matsya, Saisireya.

9. The commentator, who is here followed by
Colebrooke, states that he was a pupil of
Indrapramati; but from the Vayu it appears that
Sakapimni was another name of Rathantara, the
