BOOK V, CHAP. 1

415

नमो नमस्ते जगत: प्रव्रत्ति
विनाश-संस्थानकराप्रमेय।। ५४॥
सूक्ष्मातिसूक्ष्मातिबृहत्प्रमाण।
प्रधानबुद्धीन्दियवत्-प्रधान-
मूलात् परात्मन्! भगवन्। प्रसीद।। ५५॥
‘Glory to you, the thousand-formed, the
thousand-armed, the many-visaged, many-
footed; to you, the illimitable author of
creation, preservation and destruction; most
subtle of the subtle, most vast of the great : to
you, who are nature, intellect and
consciousness; and who are other spirit even
than the spiritual root of those prineiples.””

एषा मही देव! महीप्रसूतै-
महासुरै: पीडित-शैलबन्धा।
परायणां त्वां जगतामुपैति
भारावतारार्थमपारसारम्।। ५६॥
नासत्यदस्रौ वरुणो यमश्च।
इमे च रुद्रा वसव: ससूर्या:
समीरणाग्निप्रमुखास्तथान्ये॥ ५७॥
सुरा: समस्ता: सुरनाथ। कार्य-
मेभिर्मया यच्च सदीश सर्वम्।
आज्ञापयाज्ञां प्रतिपालयन्त-
स्तथैव तिष्ठाम सदास्तदोषा:। ५ SII

Do you show favour upon us. Behold, lord,
this earth, oppressed by mighty Asuras and
shaken to her mountain bascments, comes to
you, who is her invincible defender, to be
relieved from her burden. Behold me, Indra,
the ASvins, Varuna and Yama, the Rudras, the
Vasus, the suns, the winds, fire and all other
celestials, prepared to execute whatever you
shall will that we shall do. Do you, in whom
there is no imperfection, O sovereign of the
deities, give your orders to your servants : lo,
we are ready."

पराशर उवाच
एवं संस्तूयमानस्तु भगवान् परमेश्वर:।

उज्जहारात्मन: केशौ सित-कृष्णौ महामुने।। ५९॥
उवाच च सुरानेतौ मत् केशो वसुधातले।

अवतीर्य भुवो भार-क्लेशहानि करिष्यत:।॥ ६०॥
सुराश्च सकला: स्वांशैरवतीर्य महीतले।

कुर्वन्तु युद्धमुन्मत्तै: पुर्वोतपन्नैर्महासुरै:।। ६ १॥

तत: क्षयमशेषास्ते दैतेया धरणीतले।

प्रयास्यन्ति न सन्देहो मद्द्कपातविचूर्णिता:।। ६ २॥
वसुदेवसस्य या पत्नी देवकी देवतोपमा।
`तस्यायमष्टमो गर्भो मत्केशो भविता सुरा:॥६३॥
अवतीर्य च तत्रायं कंसं घातयिता भुवि।

कालनेमिं समुद्भूतमित्युक्तवान्तर्दधे हरि:।। ६४॥
अदृश्याय ततस्तेऽपि प्रणिपत्य महात्मने।

भेरुपृष्ठं सुरा जग्मुरवतेरुश्च TAA ६५॥

When Brahma had ended, the supreme lord
plucked off two hairs, one white and one blaek
and said to the gods, ‘‘These my hairs shall
deseend upon earth and shall relieve her of the
burden of her distress.”* Let all the gods also,
in their own portions, go down to earth and
wage war with the haughty Asuras, who are
there ineorporate and who shall every one of
them be destroyed. Doubt not of this : they
shall perish before the withering glance of
mine eyes. This my (black) hair shall be
impersonated in the eighth conception of the
wife of Vasudeva, Devaki, who is like a
goddess; and shall slay Karhsa, who is the
demon K4lanemi.’’ Thus having spoken, Hari
disappeared; and the gods bowing to him,
though invisible, returned to the summit of
mount Meru, from whence they descended
upon earth.

भविष्यतीत्याचचक्षे भगवान् नारदो मुनि:।। ६६॥
कंसोऽपि तदुपश्रुत्य नारदात् कुपितस्तत:।

देवकीं वसुदेवश्च गृहे गुप्तावधारयत्।। ६७॥

तथैव वसुदेवोऽपि पुत्रमर्पितवान् fet: ६ ८॥
हिरण्यकशिपो: gat: षड्गर्भा इति विश्रुता:।
विष्णुप्रयुक्ता तान् निद्रा क्रमाद् गर्भे न्ययोजयत्।। ६९॥
