BOOK I, CHAP. tI

7h

reverentially, and bowing humbly before
them, the prince said,
qa उवाच

उत्तानपादतनयं Bi निबोधत सनत्तमा:।

जातं सुनीत्यां निर्वॆदाद् युष्माकं प्रापमन्तिकम्॥ ३ २॥

Dhruva said— "Behold in me, venerable
men, the son of Uttaénapada, born of Suniti.
Dissatisfied with the world. I appear before
you”,

चतु:पञ्चाब्दसम्भूतो बालस्त्वं नृपनन्दन।
निर्वॆदकारणं किञ्चित् तव नाद्यापि विद्यते॥। ३ ३॥
न चिन्त्यं wat: किञ्चिद् ध्रियते भूपति: पिता।

न चैवेष्टवियोगादि wa पश्यामि बालक। ३४॥
Wat न च ते व्याधिरस्माभिरुपलक्ष्यते।

निर्वॆद: किं निमित्तं ते कथ्यतां यदि विद्यते।। ३५॥

The Rsis replied: “The son of a king, and
but four or five years of age, there can be no
reason, child, why you should be dissatisfied
with life; you cannot be in want of any thing
whilst the king your father reigns; we cannot
imagine that you suffer the pain of separation
from the object of your affections; nor do we
observe in your person any sign of disease.
What is the cause of your discontent? Tell us,
if it is known to yourself.”
पराशर उवाच

TA: स कथयामास सुरुच्या यदुदाहृतम्।
तन्निशम्य तत: प्रोचुर्मुनयस्ते परस्परम्॥३६॥
अहो क्षात्रं परं तेजो बालस्यापि यदक्षमा।
AUT मातुरुक्तस्य हृदयान्नापसर्पति।। ३७॥
भो भो क्षत्रियदायाद निर्वॆदादू यत् त्वयाधुना।
ay व्यवसितं तन्न: कथ्यतां यदि रोचते।। ३८॥
aa art तवास्माभि: साहाय्यममितद्युते।
तदुच्यतां विवक्षुस्तमस्माभिरुपलक्ष्यते।। ३ ९॥

Paragara said:— Dhruva then repeated to the
Rsis what Suruci had spoken to him; and when
they had heard his story, they said to one
another, “How surprising is the vehemence of
the Ksatriya nature, that resentment is

cheruhed even by a child, and he cannot efface
from his. mind the harsh speeches of a step-
mother. Son of a Ksatriya, tell us, if it be.
agreeable to you, what you have proposed,
through dissatisfaction with the world, to
accomplish. If you wish our aid in what you
have to do, declare it freely, for we perceive
that you are desirous to speak.”

7a उवाच
नाहमर्थमभीप्सामि न राज्यं द्विजसत्तमा:।
तत्स्थानमेकमिच्छामि भुक्तं नान्येन यत् पुरा।४०॥
एतन्मे क्रियतां सम्यक् कथ्यतां प्राप्यते यथा।
स्थानमग्र्यं समस्तेभ्य: स्थानेभ्यो मुनिसत्तमा:।।४१॥
Dhruva said— “Excellent sages, I wish not
for riches, neither do I want dominion : J
aspire to such a station as no one before me
has attained. Tell me what 1 must do to effcct
this object, how I may reach an elevation
superior to all other dignities.” The Rsis sever-
ally thus replied—
मरीचिरुवाच
अनाराधितगोविन्दैर्नरै: स्थानं नृपात्मज।
न fe सम्प्राप्यते श्रेष्ठं तस्मादाराधयाच्युतम्।। ४२॥
Marici said: “The best of stations is not
within the reach of men who fail to propitiate

Govinda. Do you, prince, worship the
undecaying (Acyuta).”
अत्रिरुवाच

Te: पराणां पुरुषो यस्य तुष्टो जनार्दन:।

स प्राप्नोत्यक्षयं रथानमेतत् सत्यं मयोदितम्॥४३॥

Atri said:- “He with whom the first of
spirits, Janarddana, is pleased, obtains
imperishable dignity. I declare unto you the
truth.”

अङ्गिरा उवाच
यस्यान्त: सर्वमेवेदमच्युतस्याव्ययात्मन:।
तमाराधय गोविन्दं स्थानमग्र्यं यदीच्छसि।॥४४॥

Angiras said:— "If you desire an exalted
station, worship that Govinda in whom,
immutable and undecaying, all that is. exists.”
