512 THE VISNU-PURANAM

vile and pithless creatures! The sovereignty of they were much alarmed, and called loudly on
the Kauravas, as well as our own, is the work Rama, saying, "Rama, Rama ! hold, hold !
of fate, whose decree it also is that they now suppress your wrath ! have mercy upon us!
disrespect or disobey the commands of Here is Samba, and his wife also, delivered up
Ugrasena. Indra may of right give his orders to to you. Forgive our sins. committed in

the gods; and Ugrasena exercises equal
authority with the lord to Sachi. Fie upon the
pride that boasts a throne, the leavings of a
hundred mortals! Is not he the sovereign of the
earth, the wives of whose servants adorn them-
selves with the blossoms of the Parijata tree?
Ugrasena shall be the undisputed king of
kings; for 1 will not return to his capital until I
have rid the world wholly of the sons of Kuru.
I will destroy Karna, Duryodhana, Drona,
Bhishma. Bahlika, Dusdsana. Bhirisravas,
Somadatta, Salya, Bhima, Arjuna, Yddhisht
hica, the twins, and all the other vile
descendants of Kuru, with their horses,
elephants, and chariots. I will rescue the hero
Samba from captivity, and carry him, along
wirh his wife, to Dvaraka, where I shall again
behold Ugrasena and the rest of my kin. Or,
authorized by the king of the gods to remove
the burdens of the earth. I will take this capital
of the Kauravas, with all the sons of Kuru, and
cast the city of the elephant into the
Bhagirathi.”

पराशर Sara

इत्युक्त्वा मदलक्ताक्ष: कर्षणाधोमुखं हलम्।
प्राकारवप्रे विन्यस्य चकर्ष मुषलायुध: ॥३१॥
आघूर्णित तत् सहसा ततो वै हस्तिनापुरम्।
qe संक्रुब्यहदयाश्चुक्रशु: सर्वकौरवा:। ३२॥
wet! राम महावाहो। क्षम्यतां क्षम्यातं त्वया।
उपसंह्रियतां कोप: प्रसीद मुषलायुध।। ३३॥
एष शाम्ब: सपत्नीकस्तव निर्यातितो बल।
अविज्ञातप्रभावाणां क्षम्यतामपराधिनाम्।। ३ ४॥

So saying, the wielder of the club, Baldeva,
his eyes red with rage, plunged the blade of his
ploughshare downwards, beneath the ramparts
of the city, and drew them towards him. When
the Kauravas beheld Hastinapura tottering,

ignorance of thy wondrous power.”
पराशरं उवाच
निष्कम्य नागरात्तूर्णं कौरवा मुनिपुङ्गव।। ३५॥
क्षान्तमेतन्मयेत्याह बलो बलवतां ATI ३६॥
अद्याप्याघूर्णिताकारं लक्ष्यते तत् Yt द्विज।
WE प्रवादो रामस्य बलशौर्योपलक्षण:॥ ३७॥
ततस्तु कौरवा: शाम्बं सम्पूज्य हलिना सह।

प्रेधयामासुरुद्धाहधनभार्यासमन्वितम्॥ ३ ८॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे पञ्चत्रिंश: अध्याय:।

Accordingly, issuing hurriedly from the
city, the Kauravas delivered Samba and his
bride to the mighty Balarama, who, bowing to
Bhisma, Drona, and Kripa, who addressed him
in conciliatory language, said, "I am satisfied
;" and so desisted. The city bears the marks of
the shock it received, even to the present
day-such was the might of R&ama—proving
both his strength and prowess. The Kauravas
then offering homage to Samba and to Bala,
dismissed the former with his wife and a bridal
portion.’

NOTES

1 This adventure is related in the Bhagavata, and
very briefly noticed in the Hari Vamsa; but I have
not found any mention of it in the Mahabhirata. It
may have been suggested originally by Hastinapura
having sustained some injury either from an
earthquake or from the encroachments of the river,
which, as is recorded, compelled the removal of the
capital to Kausambi (Bk. IV. Ch. XX.)

aK
