542

This Prakrti is essentially the same,
whether discrete or indiscrete; only that which
is discrcte is finally lost or absorbed in the
indiscrete. Spirit also, which is one, pure,
imperishable, eternal, all-pervading, is a
portion of that supreme spirit which is all
things. That spirit which is other than
(embodied) spirit, in which there are no
attributes of name, species, or the like— which
is one with all wisdom, and is to be understood
as sole existence— that is Brahma, infinite
glory, supreme spirit, supreme power, Visnu,
all that is; from whence the perfect sage
returns no more.

प्रकृतिर्या मया Gaal व्यक्ताव्यक्तस्वरूपिणी।

पुरुषश्चाप्युभावेतौ लीयते परमात्मनि।। ३९॥
परमात्मा च सर्वेषामाधार: परमेश्वर:।

विष्णुर्नाम्ना स वेदेषु वेदान्तेषु च गीयते॥४०॥

Nature (Prakrti), which I have described to
you as being essentially both discretc and
indiscrcte, and spirit (which is united with
body), both resolve into supreme spirit.
Supreme spirit is the upholder of all things,
and the ruler of all things, and is glorified in
the Vedas and in the Vedanta by the name of
Visnu.

ताभ्यामुभाभ्यां पुरुषै: सर्वमूर्ति: स इज्यते॥४१॥
ॠग्-यजु: सामभिर्मागै: प्रव्त्तैरिज्यते ह्यसौ।
यज्ञेश्वरो यज्ञपुमान् पुरुषै: पुरुषोत्तम: ॥४२॥
ज्ञानात्मा ज्ञानयोगेन ज्ञानमूर्ति: स चेज्यते।
faa योगिभिर्मार्गे विष्णुर्मुक्तिफलप्रद:।। ४३॥

Works, as enjoined by the Vedas, are of
two kinds, active (Pravritta) and quiescent
(Nivrtta); by both of which the universal
person is worshipped by mankind. He, the lord
of sacrifice, the male of sacrifice, the most
excellent male, is worshipped by men in the
active mode by rites enjoined in the Rk, Yajur
and Sama Vedas. The soul of wisdom, the
person of wisdom, Visnu, and giver of

THE VISNU-PURANAM

emancipation, is worshipped by sages in the
quiescent form, through meditative devotion.

हरस्व-दीर्घप्लुतैर्यत्तु किञ्चद्वस्त्वभियुज्यते।

यच्च वाचामविषये तत्सर्वं विष्णुरव्यय:।। ४४॥
व्यक्तं स एव चाव्यक्तं स एव पुरुषोऽव्यय:।
परमात्मा स विश्वात्मा विश्वरूपधरो eft ४५॥
व्यक्ताव्यक्तात्मिका तस्मिन् प्रकृति: सम्प्रलीयते।
पुरुषश्चापि मैत्रेय! व्यापिन्यव्याहतात्मनि॥ ४६॥

The exhaustless Visnu is whatever thing
that is designated by long, short, or prolated
syllables, or that which is without a name. He
is that which is discrete, and that which is
indiscrete: he is exhaustless spirit, supreme
spirit, universal spirit, Hari, the wearcr of
universal forms. Nature, whether discrete or
indiscrete, is absorbed into him, and
(detached) spirit also merges into the all-
diffusive and unobstructed spirit.

farrier: काल: कथितो यो मया तव।
तदहस्तस्य मैत्रेय! विष्णोरीशस्य कथ्यते॥ ४७॥
व्यक्ते च प्रकृतौ लीने प्रकृत्यां पुरुषे तथा।

wa स्थिते निशा चान्या तत्प्रमाणा महामुने।। ४ ८॥
नैवाहस्तस्य न From नित्यस्य परमात्मन:।
उपचारस्तथाप्येष तस्येशस्य द्विजोच्यते।। ४९॥

The period of two Pararddhas, as I have
described it to you, Maitreya, is called a day of
that potent Visnu; and whilst the products of
nature are merged into their source, nature into
spirit, and that into the supreme, that period is
termed his night, and is of equal duration with
his day. But, in fact, to that eternal supreme
spirit there is neither day nor night, and these
distinctions are only figuratively applied to the
almighty.

इत्येष तव मैत्रेय! कथित: प्राकृतो लय:।
आत्यन्तिकमितो ब्रह्मन्निबोध प्रतिसञ्चरम्। ५०॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे षष्ठांशे age: अध्याय:।।

I have thus explained to you the nature of
elemental dissolution, and will now expound
to you which is final’.
