BOOK I, CHAP. 5

29

threc were the Prakrta creations, the
developments of indiscrete nature, preceded
by the indiscrete principle’. The fourth or
fundamental creation (of perceptible things)
was that of inanimate bodies. The fifth. the
Tairyag yonya creation, was that of animals.
The sixth was the Orddhasrotas creation, of
that of the divinities.

ततोऽर्वाक्स्नोतस: सर्ग: सप्तम: स तु मानुष:।

अष्टमोऽनुग्रह: सर्ग: सात्तविकस्तामसश्च स:।। २२॥

Waa वैकृता: सर्गा: प्राकृतास्तु त्रय: स्मृता:।

प्राकृतो वैकृताश्चैव कौमारो नवम: TAT २३॥

The creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was
the seventh, and was that of man. There is an
eighth creation, termed Anugraha, which
possesses both the qualities of goodness and
darkness.'!' Of these creations, five are
sccondary, and thrce are primary’*, But there
is a ninth, the Kaumara creation, whieh is both
primary and secondary".

इत्येत्ते वै समाख्याता नव सर्गा: प्रजापते:।
प्राकृता वैकृताश्चैव जगतो मूलहेतव:।
सृजतो जगदीशस्य किमन्यत् श्रोतुमिच्छसि।। २४॥

These arc the nine creations of the great
progenitor of all, and both as primary and
secondary, are the radical causes of the world,
proceeding from the sovereign creator. What
clse dost you desire to hear ?

aaa sara
संक्षेपात् कथित: सर्गो देवादीनां मुने त्वया।
विस्तराच्छोतुमिच्छामि त्वत्तो मुनिवरोत्तम।। २५॥

Maitreya said— You have briefly related to
me. Muni, the creation of the gods and other
beings: I am desirous, chief of sages, to hear
from you a more ample account of their
creation.

पराशर उवाच
कर्मभिर्भाविता: yet: कुशलाकुशलैस्तु ता:।
ख्यात्यातया ह्यनिर्मुक्ता संहारे STATA EM
स्थावरान्ता: सुराद्यास्तु प्रजा ब्रह्मंश्चतुर्विधा:।
ब्रह्मण: कुर्वत: सृष्टिं जज्ञिरे मानसास्तु ता:॥ २७॥

ततो देवासुरपित् न् मानुषांश्च चतुष्टयम्।
सिसृक्षुरम्भांस्येतानि स्वमात्मानमयूयुजत्।। २८॥
युक्तात्मनस्तमोमात्रा उद्रिक्ताभूत् प्रजापते:।
सिसृक्षोर्ज्जघनात् पूर्वमसुरा जज्ञिरे तत:॥ २९॥
उत्ससर्ज ततस्तान्तु तमोमात्रात्मिकां तनुम्।

सा तु त्यक्ता ततस्तेन मैत्रेयाभूद् विभावरी।। 3 ott
सिसृक्षुरन्यदेहस्थ: प्रीतिमाप at: सुरा:।
सत्त्वोद्गिक्ता: समुद्भूता मुखतो ब्रह्मणो fe ३ १॥
त्यक्ता सा तु तनुस्तेन सत्त्वप्रायमभूद् दिनम्।

ततो fe बलिनो रात्रावमुरा देवता दिवा।। ३ २॥
सत्त्वमात्रात्मिकामॆव AISA जगृहे तनुम्।
पितॄवन्मन्यमानस्य पितरस्तस्य जज्ञिरे।। ३ ३॥
उत्ससर्ज्ज पितॄन् GET ततस्तामपि स प्रभु:।

स चोत्सृष्टाऽभवत् सन्ध्या दिननक्तान्तरस्थिति:। ३४॥

Parasara said— Created beings, although
they are destroyed (in their individual forms)
at the periods of dissolution, yet being affected
by the good or evil acts of former existcncc,
they are never cxemptcd from their
consequences; and when Brahma creates the
world anew, they are the progeny of his will,
in the fourfold condition of gods, men,
animals, or inanimate things. Brahma then,
being desirous of creating the four orders of
beings, termed gods, demons, progenitors, and
men, collected his mind into itself.'* Whilst
thus concentrated, the quality of darkness
pervaded his body; and thence the demons (the
Asuras) were first born, issuing from his thigh.
Brahma then abandoned that form which was
composed of the rudiment of darkness, and
which, being deserted by him, became night.
Continuing to create. but assuming a different
shapc, he experienced pleasure; and thence
from his mouth proceeded thc gods, endowed
with the quality of goodness. The form
abandoned by him, became day, in which the
good quality predominates; ard hence by day
the gods are most powerful, and by night the
demons. He next adopted another person, in
which the rudiment of goodness also
prevailed, and thinking of himself, as the
