556

THE VISNU-PURANAM

योगयुक् प्रथमं योगी युञ्जानो ह्राभिधीयते
विनिष्पन्नसमाधिस्तु परं ब्रह्मोपलब्धिमान्।। ३३॥
यद्यन्तरायदोषेण दूष्यते नास्य मानसम्।
जन्मान्तरैरभ्यसतो मुक्ति: पूर्वस्य जायते ॥ ३४॥

विनिष्पन्नसमाधिस्तु मुक्तिं तत्रैव sah

प्राप्नोति योगी योगाग्निदग्धकर्म्मचयोऽचिरात्।। ३५॥
ब्रह्मधर्यमहिंसा च सत्यास्तेयापरिग्रहान्।

सेवेत योगी निष्कामो योग्यतां स्वप्ननो नयन्।। ३६॥
कुर्वीत ब्रह्मणि तथा परस्मिन् प्रवणं मन:।।३७॥

“The sage, or Yogi, when first applying
himself to contemplative devotion is called the
novice or practitioner (Yoga yuj); when he has
attained spiritual union he is termed the adept,
or he whose meditations are accomplished*.
Should the thoughts of the former be
unvitiated by any obstructing imperfection, he
will obtain freedom, after practising devotion
through several lives’. The latter speedily
obtains liberation in that existence (in which
he reaches perfection), all his acts being
consumed by the fire of contemplative
devotion. The sage who would bring his mind
into a fit state for the performance of devout
contemplation must be devoid of desire, and
observe invariably continence, compassion,
truth, honesty, and disinterestedness: he must
fix his mind intently on the supreme Brahma,
practising holy study, purification,
contentment, penance and self-control.

एते यमा: सनियमा: पञ्च पञ्च प्रकीर्तिता:।
विशिष्टफलदा: काम्या: निष्कामाणां विमुक्तिदा:॥ ३ ८॥
एकं भद्रासनादीनां समास्थाय गुणैर्युत:।
यमाख्यैर्नियमाख्यैश्च gait नियतो यति:।। ३९॥
प्राणाख्यमनिलं वश्यमभ्यासात् कुरुते तु यत्।
प्राणायाम: स विज्ञेय: सबीजोऽबीज Va च।।४०॥
परस्परेणाभिभवं प्राणापानौ यदानिलौ।

Hed: सद्विधानेन तृतीय: संयमात्तयो:।।४१॥

तस्य चालम्बनवत: स्थूलं रूपं द्विजोत्तम।
आलम्बनमनन्तस्य योगिनोऽभ्यसत: स्मृतम्।।४२॥

These virtues, respectively termed the five
acts of restraint (Yama), and five of obligation
(Niyama), bestow excellent rewards when
practised for the sake of reward, and eternal
liberation when they are not prompted by
desire (of transient benefits). Endowed with
these merits, the sage self-restrained should sit
in one of the modes termed Bhadrasana, etc.,
and engage in contemplation’. Bringing his
vital airs, called Prana, under subjection, by
frequent repetition, is thence called
Pranayama, which is as it were a seed with a
seed’. In this the breath of expiration and that
of inspiration are alternately obstructed,
constituting the act twofold; and _ the
suppression of both modes of breathing
produces a third’. The exercise of the Yogi,
whilst endeavouring to bring before his
thoughts the gross form of the eternal, is
denominated Alambana”.

शब्दादिष्वनुरक्तानि निगृह्याक्षाणि योगवित्।
कुर्याच्चित्तानुचारीणि प्रत्याहारपरायण:॥४३॥
वश्यता परमा तेन जायतेऽतिचलात्मनाम्।
इन्दियाणामवश्यैस्तैर्न योगी योगसाधक:।॥ ४४॥

He is then to perform the Pratyahara, which
consists in restraining his organs of sense from
susceptibility to outward impressions, and
directing them entirely to mental perceptions.
By these means the entire subjugation of the
unsteady senses is effected; and if they are not
controlled, the sage will not accomplish his
devotions.

प्राणायामेन पवनै: प्रत्याहारेण चेन्द्रियै:।
वशीकृतैस्ततत: कुर्यात् स्थिरं चेत: YT ४५॥

When by the Pranayama the vital airs are

restrained, and the senses are subjugated by

the Pratyahara, then the sage will be able to
keep his mind steady in its perfect asylum.”

खाण्डिक्य उवाच
कथ्यतां मे महाभाग। चेतसो य: शुभाश्रय:।
यदाधारमशेषं तद्धन्ति दोषसमुद्धवम्॥४६॥
