490 THE VISNU-PURANAM
अविज्ञोऽयं मया ga बलदेव: पराजित:। कलिङ्गराजञ्जादय विस्फुरन्तं बलाद् बल:।
मुधैवाक्षावलेपान्धो य: स्वं मेनेऽक्षकोविदम्॥ १६॥ वभञ्च दन्तान् कुपितो यै: प्रकाशं जहास स: ॥ २४॥
दृष्टवा कलिङ्गराजं तं प्रकाशदशनाननम्। आकृष्य च महास्तम्भं जातरूपमयं बल:।

रुक्मिणञ्जापि दुर्वाक्यं art चक्रे हलायुध:॥ १७॥

aa: कोपपरीतात्मा निष्ककोटिं हलायुध:।

Tee जग्राह रुक्मी च तदर्थेऽक्षानपातयत्॥ १८॥

Tafa रुक्मी प्राहोच्चैरलीकोक्तेरलं बल।। १९॥

The potent Rukmin replied to them, and
said, "So let it be:' and he engaged Balarama at
a game of dice in the palace,: Balarama soon
lost to Rukmin a thousand Niskas’: he then
staked and lost another thousand; and then
pledged ten thousand, which Rukmin, who
was well skilled in gambling, also won. At this
the king of Kalinga laughed aloud, and the
weak and exulting Rukmin grinned, and said,
"Baladeva is losing, for he knows nothing of
the game; although, blinded by a vain passion
for play, he thinks he understands the dice."
Halayudha, galled by the broad laughter of the
Kalinga prince, and the eontemptuous speech
of Rukmin, was exceedingly angry, and,
overcome with passion, increased his stake to
ten millions of Niskas. Rukmin accepted the
challenge, and therefore threw the dice.
Baladeva won, and cried aloud, "The stake is
mine.” But Rukmin called out as loudly, that
he was the winner.

त्वयोक्तोऽयं ग्लह: सत्यं न ममैषोऽनुमोदित:।
एवं त्वया चेद् विजितं मया न विजितं कथम्।। २०॥

“Tell no lies, Bala," said he:”’the stake is
yours; that is true; but I did not agree to it:
although this be won by you, yet still I am the
winner."

अथान्तरिक्षे वागुच्चे: wre गम्भीरनादिनी।

बलदेवस्य तद्कोप वर्द्धयन्ती महात्मन:।। २१॥

जितं बलेन धर्म्मण रुक्मिणी भाषितं मृषा।
अनुक्त्वापि aa: किञ्चित् कृतं भवति atom २२॥
ततो बल: समुत्याय कोप संरक्तलोचन:।
जघानाष्टापदेनैव रुक्मिणं सुमहाबल: ॥२३॥

जघान येऽन्ये तत्पक्षा भूभृत: कुपितो बलात् ॥ २५॥

A deep voice was then heard in the sky,
inflaming still more the anger of the high-
spirited Baladeva, saying, "Bala has rightly
won the whole sum, and Rukmin speaks
falsely: altiiough be did not accept the pledge
in words, he did so by his acts (having cast the
dice).” Balaréma thus excited, his eyes red
with rage, started up, and struck Rukmin with
the board on which the game was played, and
killed him’, Taking hold of’ the trembling king
of Kalinga, he knocked out the tecth which he
had shown when he laughed. Laying hold of a
golden column, he dragged it from its place,
and used it as a weapon to kill those princes
who had taken part with his adversaries.

ततो wletadt सर्वं पलायनपरं द्विज।
तद्राजमण्डलं भीतं बभूव HIT बले।। २६॥
बलेन fad grat रुक्मिणं मधूसूदन:।
Tare किञ्चिन्मैत्रैय! रुक्मिणी-बलयोर्भयात्।। २७॥
ततोऽनिरुद्दमादाय कृतोद्बाहं द्विजोत्तम।
द्वारकामाजगामाथ यदुचक्रं सकेशवम्।। २८॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे अष्टाविंश: अध्याय:॥

Upon which the whole circle, crying out
with terror, took to fight, and escaped from the
wrath of Baladeva. When Krsna heard that
Rukmin had been kilted by his brother, he
made no remark, being afraid to Rukmini on
the one hand, and of Bala on the other; but
taking with him the newly wedded Aniruddha,
and the Yadava tribe, he returned to Dvaraka.

NOTES

1 The number specified, however, both in this
place and in c. 32, is nine, instead of eight. The
commentator endeavours to explain the difference
by identifying Rohini with Jambavati: but in the
notices of Krsna's posterity, both in this work and
in the Bhagavata. she is distinct from Jambavati.
