BOOK Il, CHAP. 16

219

sweetened and unsweetened food, you shall
hear my explanation. What is there that is
really sweet or not sweet, to one eating a
meal? That which is sweet, is no longer so
when it oeeasions the sense of repletion; and
that whieh is not sweet, becomes sweet when a
man (being very hungry) faneies that it is so.
What food is there that first, middle, and iast is
equally grateful.

पार्थिवोऽयं तथा देह: पार्थिवै: परमाणुभि:।। २९॥

यव-गोधूम-मुद्गादि घृतं तैलं पयो दधि।

गुडं फलादीनि तथा पार्थिवा: परमाणव:।।३०॥

तदेतदू भवता Wear मृष्टामृष्टविचारि यत्।
तन्मन: समतालम्बि कार्यं साम्यं fe मुक्तये।। ३ a
As a house built of elay is stregthened by

fresh plaster, so is this earthly body supported
by earthly particles; and barley, wheat, pulse,
butter, oil, milk, eurds, treacle, fruits, and the
like, are composed of atoms of earth. This
therefore is to be understood by you, that the
mind which properly judges of what is or is
not sweet is impressed with the notion of
identity, and that this effeet of identity tends to
liberation.

ब्राह्मण उवाच
इत्याकर्ण्य वचस्तस्य परमार्थाश्रितं नृप।
प्रणिपत्य महाभागो निदाघो वाक्यमब्रवीत्।। ३ २॥
निदाघ उवाच

प्रसीद मद्भितार्थाय कथ्यतां यस्त्वमागत:।

AB मोहस्तवाकर्ण्य वचांस्येतानि मे fet ३३॥

“Having heard these words, eonveying the
substanee of ultimate truth, Nidadgha fell at the
feet of his visitor, and said, ‘Show favour to
me, illustrious Brahmana, and tell me who it is
that for my good has come hither, and by
whose words the infatuation of my mind is
dissipated.’

ऋभुरुवाच
ऋभुरस्मि तवाचार्य: प्रज्ञादानाय ते द्विज।
इहागतोऽहं यास्यामि परमार्थस्तवोदित:।। ३ ४॥

एवमेकमिदं विद्धि न भेदि सकलं जगत्।
वासुदेवाभिधेयस्य स्वरूपं परमात्मन:।। ३५॥

To this, Rbhu answered, ‘I am Rbhu, your
preeeptor, come hither to communieate to you
true wisdom; and having deelared to you what
that is, I shall depart. Know this whole
universe to be the one undivided nature of the
supreme spirit, entitled Vasudeva.’

ब्राह्मण sara
तथेत्युक्त्वा: निदाघेन प्रणिपातपुर:सरम्।
पूजित: परया भक्त्या इच्छात: प्रययाव्रभु:।। ३६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:।

Thus having spoken, and reeeiving the
prostrate homage of Nidagha, rendered with
fervent faith, Rbhu went his way.

KEK
