414

THE VISNU-PURANAM

>

"O you,”’ said Brahma, ‘‘who are distinct
from holy writ®; whose double nature is
twofold wisdom’, superior and inferior and
who are the essential end of both; who, alike
devoid and possessed of form, are the twofold
Brahma’; smallest of the least and largest of
the large; all and knowing al! things; that spirit
which is language; that spirit which is
supreme; that which is Brahma and of which
Brahma is composed! You are the Rk, the
Yajus, the Saéman and the Atharvan Vedas.
You are accentuation, ritual, signification,
metre and astronomy; history, tradition,
grammar, theology, logic and law : you who
are inscrutable. You are the doctrine that
investigates the distinctions between soul and
life and body and matter endowed with quali-
ties'’; and that doctrine is nothing else but
your nature inherent in and presiding over it’.
You are imperceptible, indescribable, incon-
ceivable; without name or colour or hands or
feet; pure, eternal and infinite. You hear
without ears and see without eyes. You are one
and multiform. You move without feet; you
seize without hands. You know all, but are not
by all to be known”. He who beholds you as
the most subtle of atoms, not substantially
existent, puts an end to ignorance; and final
emancipation is the reward of that wise man
whose understanding cherishes nothing other
than you in the form of supreme delight'*. You
are the common centre of all'®, the protector of
the world and all beings exist in you : all that
has been or will be, you are. You are the atom
of atoms; you are spirit; you only are distinct
from primeval nature”. You, as the lord of fire
in four manifestations'’, give light and fertility
to Earth. You are the eye of all and wearer of
many shapes and unobstructedly traverses the
three regions of the universe. As fire, though
one, is variously kindled and, though
unchangeable in its essence, is modified in
many ways, so you, lord, who are, one
omnipresent form, take upon you all
modifications that exist. You are one supreme;
you are that supreme and eternal state which

the wise behold with the eye of knowledge.
There is nothing else but you. O lord; nothing;
else has been or will be. You are both discrete
and indiscreet, universal and individual,
omniscient, all seeing, omnipotent, possessed
of all wisdom and strength and power. You are
liable neither to diminution nor increase; you
are independence and without beginning; you
are the subjugator of all. You are unaffected
by weariness, sloth, fear, anger or desire. You
are free from soil, supreme, merciful,’
uniform, undecaying, lord over all, the stay of
all, the fountain of light, imperishable. To you,
uninvested by material envelopes,'” unexposed
to sensible imaginings, aggregate of elemental
substance,” spirit supreme, be adoration. You
assume a shape, O pervader of the universe,
not as the consequence of virtue or vice, nor
from any mixture of the two, but for the sole
object of maintaining piety in the world.”””

पराशर उवाच
इत्येवं संस्तुति श्रुत्वा मनसा भगवानज:।
ब्रह्माणमाह प्रीतात्मा विश्वरूपधरो हरि:॥ ५ १॥

The unborn, universal Hari, having heard
with his mental ear these eulogiums, was
pleased and thus spoke to Brahma :

श्रोभगवानुवाच
भो भो ब्रह्मन्! त्वया मत्त: सह देवैर्यदिष्यते।

तदुच्यतामशेषं a: सिद्धमेवावधार्यताम्।। ५ २॥

`“[ट me, Brahman, what you and the gods
desire : speak boldly, ccrtain of success,’’

UUM उवाच
ततो ब्रह्मा हरेर्दिव्यं विश्वरूपमवेक्ष्य तत्।
Gera भूयो देवेषु साध्वसावनतात्मसु।। ५ ३॥
ParaSara said- Brahma, beholding the
divine, universal form of Hari, quickly

prostrated himself and again renewed his
praises.

ब्रह्मोवाच
नमो नमस्तेऽस्तु सहस्रमूर्त्त!
सहस्रवाहो! बहुवक्त्रपाद।
