BOOK V, CHAP. 18

463

तोयेशो धनपतिरन्तकस्त्वमेको
भिन्नार्थैर्जगदपि पासि शक्तिभेदै:।। ५६॥
fat भवान् सृजति सूर्य्यगभस्तिरूपो
विश्वञ्च ते गुणमयोऽयमज! wan
ज्ञानात्मने सदसते प्रणतोऽस्मि तस्मै॥५७॥
ॐऊँ नमो वासुदेवाय wa: सङ्कर्षणाय ते।
प्रद्युम्नाय नमस्तुभ्यनिरुद्धाय ते नम:॥५८॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे अष्टादश: अध्याय:।।
"Salutation to you, who is uniform and
manifold, all-pervading, supreme spirit, of
inconceivable glory, and who are simple
existence. Salutation to you, O inscrutable,
who are truth, and the essence of oblations.
Salutation to you, O lord, whose nature is
unknown, who is beyond primeval matter,
who exist in five forms, as one with the
elements, with the faculties, with matter, with
the living soul, with supreme spirit. Show
favour to me, O soul of the universe, essence
of all things, perishable or eternal, whether
addressed by the designation of Brahma, Vis
nu, Siva, or the like. I adore you, O god,
whose nature is indescribable, whose purposes
are inscrutable, whose name even is unknown;
for the attributes of kind or appellation are not
applicable to you, who is THAT’, the supreme
Brahma, eternal, unchangeable, uncreated. But
as the accomplishment of our object cannot be
attained except through some specific form,
you are termed by us Krsna, Achyuta, Ananta,
or Visnu. You, unborn divinity, are all the
objects of thesc impersonations; you are the
gods, and all other beings; you are the whole
world; you are all. Soul of the universe you are
exempt from change, and there is nothing
except you in all this existence. You are
Brahma, Pasupati, Aryaman, Dhatri, and
Vidhatri; you are Indra, air, fire, the regent of
the waters, the god of wealth, and judge of the
dead; and you, although but one, preside over
the world with various energies, addressed to
various purposes. You, identical with the solar

ray, create the universe; all elementary
substance is composed of thy qualities; and
thy supreme form is denoted by the
imperishable term sat (existence). To him who
is one with true knowledge, who is and is not
perceptible, I bow. Glory be to him, the lord
Vasudeva, to Sankarsana, to Pradyumna, and
to Aniruddha.’

NOTES

1 In the Bhagavata, Hari Vamsa, etc. several
adventures of Krsna, during his residence at Vraja,
are recorded, of which our text makes no mention.
Of these, the two most popular are Krsna's taking
away the clothes of the Gopis whilst bathing, and
his liberating the Gopas from the mouth of
Aghasura, disguished as a vast serpent, into which
they had entered, thinking it a cavern in a
mountain. The omission of these two legends, or of
any of the rest, is not much to be regretted.

2 The noonday prayer; or-Sandhya.

3 By his Dhyana, or force of meditation, in
which it is attempted to bring before the mind's eye
some definite form of the object of adoration, In
this case Akriira is compelled to see a form he did
not anticipate. The Hari VamSa very clumsily sets
him to meditate upon the serpent Sesha, which
spoils the story, intended as that is to exhibit the
identity of Balarama and Krsna with the supreme.

4 Balarama was thus visible in his real character
of Sesa, the chief of serpents, the couch of Visnu,
and supporter or the world.

5 Or rather, he beheld Ghanasyama, an
appellation of Krsna, who is so called from being as
black (Syama) as a cloud (ghana).

6 Tad, ‘that’; all that is, or that can be conceived.

7 Akrira's piety is here prophetic; the son and
grandson of Krsna (see Bk. IV. Ch. XV.) are not
yet born:’ but this is the Vaisnava style of
addressing Krsna or Visnu, as identical with four
Vyihas, ‘arrangements’ or ‘dispositions,’ Krsna,
Balarama, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, See As. Res.
XVI. 35. In this, as in several other places, the Vis
nu PUR4nA differs from some of the other
narratives of Krsna, by the length and character of
the prayers addressed to Visnu. The Hari Vamsa,
for instance, here has no prayer or panegyric at all:
the Bhagavata inserts one.
