BOOK II, CHAP. 8

193

दधार शिरसा प्रीत्या वर्षाणामधिकं शतम्।। १० ९॥
शम्भोर्जटाकलापाच्च विनिष्कान्तास्थिशर्करा:।
प्लावयित्वा दिवं Fret पापाढ्यान् सगरात्मजान्।। ११०॥
स्नातस्य सलिले यस्या: सद्य: पापं प्रणश्यति।
अपूर्वपुण्यप्राप्तिश्च Wal मैत्रेय जायते।। १११॥
aa: पितृभ्यो यत्रापस्तनयै: श्रद्धयान्वितै:।
समात्रयं प्रयच्छन्ति तृप्तिं मैत्रेय दुर्लभाम्।। ११२॥
यस्यामिट्टा महायज्ञैर्यज्ञेशं पुरुषोत्तमम्।
द्विजभूता: परामृद्धिमवापुर्दिवि चेह च॥ ११३॥
स्नानाद्बिधूतपापाश्च यज्जले यतयस्तथा।
केशवासक्तमनस: प्राप्ता निर्वाणमुत्तमम्।। ११४॥
श्रुताऽभिलषिता दृष्टा VST पीताऽवगाहिता।
सा पावयति भूतानि कीर्तिता च दिने दिने।। ११५॥
स्थितैरुच्चरितं हन्ति ort जन्मत्रयाजितम्॥ ११६॥
Qa: सा पावनायालं त्रयाणां जगतामपि।
समुद्धूता Ut तत्तु तृतीयं भगवत्पदम्।। ११७॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे अष्टमोऽध्याय:।

From that third region of the atmosphere,
or seat of Visnu, proceeds the stream that
washes away all sin, the river Ganga,
embrowned with the unguents of the nymphs
of heaven, who have sported in her waters.
Having her source in the nail of the great toe
of Visnu's left foot, Dhruva”’ reccives her, and
sustains her day and night devoutly on his
head; and thence the seven Rsis practise the
exercises of austerity in her waters, wreathing
their braided locks with her waves. The orb of
the moon, cncompassed by her accumulated
current, derives augmented lustre from her
contact. Falling from on high, as she issues
from the moon, she alights on the summit of
Meru, and thence flows to the four quarters of
the earth, for its purification. The ira,
Alakananda, Caksu, and Bhadra are four
branches of but one river, divided according to
the regions towards which it proceeds. The
branch that is known as the Alakananda was
borne affectionately by Mahadeva, upon his
head, for more than a hundred years, and was

the river which raised to heaven the sinful sons
of Sagara, by washing their ashes. The
offences of any man who bathes in this river
are immediately expiated, and unprecedented
virtue is engendered. Its waters, offered by
sons to their ancestors in faith for three years,
yield to the latter rarely attainable
gratification. Men of the twice-born orders,
who offer-sacrifice in this river to the lord of
sacrifice, Purusottama, obtain whatever they
desire, either here or in heaven. Saints who are
purified from all soil by bathing in its waters,
and whose minds are intent on Kesava, acquire
thereby final liberation. This sacred stream,
heard of, desired, seen, touched, bathed in, or
hymncd, day by day, sanctifies all beings; and
those who, even at a distance of a hundred
leagues, exclaim “Ganga, Ganga,” atone for
the sins committed during three previous lives.
The place whence this river proceeds, for the
purification of the three worlds, is the third
division of the celestial regions, the seat of

Visnu.”
RK

NOTES

1, The sun’s case is 10,000 Yojanas broad, and
as many deep, according to the Vayu and Matsya.
The Bhagavata makes it thirty-six hundred
thousand long, and one fourth that broad. The
Linga agrees with the text.

2. There is no great difference in this number in
other accounts. The length of this axle, which
extends from Meru to Manasa, is nearly equal to
the semi-diameter of the earth, which, according to
the Matsya P., is 18,95,000 Yojanas.

3. The three naves are the three divistons of the
day, morning, noon, and night; the five spokes are
the five cyclic years; and the six peripherics are the
six seasons. The Bhagavata explains the three naves
to be three periods of the year, of four months each,
and gives twelve spokes as types of the twelve
months. The Vayu, Matsya, and Bhavisya Puranas
enter into much more detail. According to them, the
parts of the wheel are the same as above described :
the body of the car is the year; its upper and lower
half are the two solstices; Dharma is its flag; Artha
and Kama the pins of the yoke and axle; night is its
