BOOK I, CHAP. 7

45

he performs the office of Brahma, he should be
regarded as that divinity: but this is not exactly the
case, although it has been so rendered by the
Franch translator. Apava becomes twofold, and in
the capacity of his male half begets offspring by the
female. Again, it is said Visnu created Viraj. and
Viraj created the male, which is Vairaja or Manu;
who was thus the second interval (Antaram), or
stage, in creation. That is, according to the
commentator, the first stage was the creation of
Apava, or Vasistha, or Viraj, by Visnu, through the
agency of Hiranyagarbha or Brahma; and the next
was that of the creation of Manu by Viraj. Sataripa
appears as first the bride of Apava, and then as the
wife of Manu, This account therefore, although
obscurely expressed, appears to be essentially the
same with that of Manu; and we have Brahmi,
Viraj, Manu, instead of Brahma and Manu. It seems
probable that this difference, and the part assigned
to Viraj, has originated in some measure from
confounding Brahma with the male half of his
individuality, and considering as two beings that
which was but one. If the Puruaha or Viraj be
distinct from Brahma, what becomes of Brahma ?
The entire whole and its two halves cannot co-exist.
although some of the Pauraniks and the author of
Manu seem to have imagined its possibility, by
making Viraj the son of Brahma. The perplexity,
however, is still more ascribable to the
personification of that which was only an allegory.
The division of Brahma into two halves designates,
as is very evident from the passage in theVedas
given by Colebrooke, (As. २ VIII. 425.) the
distinction of corporeal substance into two sexes :
Viraj being all male animals, Sataripa all female
animals. So the commentator on the Hari Varhsa
explains the former to denote the horse, the bull,
etc,; and the latter. the mare, the cow, and the like.
In the Bhagavata the term Viraj implies, Body,
collectively, as the commentator observes; समष्टिशरीरं
स्वधिष्ण्यं प्रतपन् बहिश्च एवं विराजं
प्रतपंस्तपत्यन्तर्व्वहि: पुमान्। ‘As the sub illuminates his
own inner sphere, as well as the exterior regions, so
soul, shining in body (Viraja), irradiates all without
and within.” fare देहं प्रकाशयन् ब्रह्माण्ड प्रकाशयति। All
therefore that the birth of Viraj was intended to
express, was the creation of living body, of
creatures of both sexes: and as in consequence man
was produced, he might be said to the son of Viraj,

or bodily existence. Again Satartipa, the bride of
Brahma, or of Viraj, or of Manu, is nothing more
than beings of varied of manifold forms, from Sata,
‘a hundred’ and ®4, ‘form;’ explained by the
annotator on the Hari Vamsa by Anantariipa
(SARIS) ‘of infinite,” and  Vividharipa
(बिबिधरूपा), ‘ of diversified shape;’ being, as he
stares the same as May, ‘illusion,’ or the power of
multiform metamorphosis: अनैकरूपधारणसामर्थ्य। The
Matsya Purana has a little allegory of its own, on
the subject of Brahm4’'s intercourse with Satartipa;
for it explains the former to mean, the Vedas, and
the latter the Savitri, or holy place, which is their
chief text; and in their cohabitation there no evil:
वेदराशि: स्मृतो ब्रह्मा सावित्री तदधिष्ठिता। तस्मान्न कश्चिद्दोष: स्यात्
सावित्री गामने विभो:॥

6. The Brahma Purana has a different order, and
makes Vira the Son of the first pair, who has
Uttanapada, etc. by Kamya. The commeotator on
the Hari Varhsa quotes the Vayu for a confirmation
of this account: but the passage there is. वैराजात्
Ted शतरूंपा व्यजायत उत्तानपादप्रितव्रतौ। ‘Sataripa bore to
the male Vairaja (Manu) two Viras,' i. e. heroes or
heroic sons, Uttanpada and Priyavrata, It looks as if
the compiler of the Brahma Purina had made some
very unaccountable blunder, and invented upon it a
new couple, Vira and Kamya. : no such person as
the former occurs in any other Purana, nor does
Kamya, as his wife.

7. The Bhagavata adds a third daughter,
Devahtiti: for the purpose apparently of
introducing a long legend of the Rsi Kardama,
to whom she is married, and of their son
Kapila : a legend not met with any where else.

8. Ruci is reckoned amongst the Prajapatis by the
Linga and Vayu Puranas.

9. These descendants of Svéyambhuva are all
evidently allegorical ; thus Yajfia is ‘sacrifice,’ and
Daksina, 'donation’ to Brahmanas.

10, The Bhagvata (b. IV. c. 1) says the Tushitas.
but they are the divinities of the second, not of the
first Manvantara, as appears also in another part of
the same, where the Yamas are likewise referred to
the Svayambbuva Manvantara.

ll. These twenty-four daughters are of much
less universal occurrence in the Puranas than the
more extensive series of fifty or sixty, which is
subscquently described, and which appears to be
the more ancient legend.
