BOOK V, CHAP. 13

449

regret at not beholding him: and others, again,
reflecting upon the cause of the world, in the
form of the supreme Brahma, obtained by their
sighing final emancipation.

गोपीपरिव्रृती रात्रिं शरच्चन्द्रमनोरमाम्।
मानयामास गोविन्दो रासारम्भरसोत्सुक:॥ २३॥
गोप्यश्च FIT: कृष्णचेष्टास्वायत्तमूर्त्तय:।
अन्यदेशं गते कृष्णे चेरुर्बुन्दावनान्तरम्।। २४॥
कृष्णे निरुद्धृहृदयां इदमूचु: परस्परम्।
कृष्णोऽहमेतल्ललितं व्रजाम्यालोक्यतां गति:।
अन्या ब्रवीति कृष्णस्य मम गीतिर्निशम्यताम्॥ २५॥
दुष्टकालिय। तिष्ठात्र कृणोऽहमिति चापरा।
बाहुमास्फोट्य कृष्णस्य लीलासर्वस्वमाददे।। २६॥॥
अन्या ब्रवीति भो गोपा! नि:शङ्कै: स्थीयतामिह।
अलं वृष्टिभयेनात्र gat गोवर्द्धनो AAT २७॥
धेनुकोऽयं मया क्षिप्तो विचरन्तु यथेच्छया।

गोपी ब्रवीति वै चान्याकृष्णलीलानुकारिणी।॥। २८॥

Thus ऽपाल्पातटत by the Gopis, Krsna
thought lovely moonlight night of autumn
propitious to the Rasa dance.’ Many of the
Gopis imitated the different actions of Krsna,
and in his absence wandered through
Vrindavan, representing his person. “I am Krs
na,” cries one; "behold the elegance of my
movements. “I am Krsna,” exclaims another;
“listen to my song.” “Vile K4liya, stay! for I
am Krsna,” is repeated by a third, slapping her
arms in defiance. A fourth calls out,
"Herdsmen, fear nothing; the danger of the
storm is over, for, lo 1 lift up Govarddhana for
your shelter.” And a fifth proclaims, “Now let
the heads graze where they will, for I have
destroyed Dhenuka.”

एवं नानाप्रकारासु कृष्णचेष्टासु तास्तदा।

गोप्यो व्यग्रा: समं चेरु रम्यं वृन्दावनान्तरम्।। २९॥
विलोक्यैका ya ore गोपी गोपवराङ्गना।
पुलकाञ्चितसर्वाङ्गी विकाशि-नयनोत्पला॥ ३ ०॥
षदान्येतानि कृष्णस्य लीलालङ्कृतगामिन:।॥ ३ १॥
कापि तेन समं याता कृतपुण्या मदालसा।

पदानि तस्याश्चैतानि घनान्यल्पतनूनि च ॥३२॥

Thus in various actions of Krsna the Gopis
imitated him, whilst away, and beguiled their
sorrow by mimicking his sports. Looking
down upon the ground, one damsel call to her
friend, as the light down upon her body stands
erect with joy, and the lotuses of her eyes
expand,” See here are the marks of Krsna's
feet, as he has gone alone sprotively, and left
the impressions of the banner, the thuodebolt,
and the goad.” What lovely maiden has been
his companion, inebriate with passion, as her
irregular footmarks testify?

पुष्पावचयमत्रोच्चैश्चक्रे दामोदरो ध्रुवम्।
येनाग्राक्रान्तिमात्राणि पदान्यत्र महात्मन:।। ३ ३॥
अत्रोपविश्य सा aa कापि पुष्पैरलङ्कृता।
अन्यजन्मनि सर्वात्मा विष्णुरभ्यर्चितो यया।। ३४॥
पुष्पबन्धनसम्मान-कृतमानामपास्य ताम्।
नन्दोपसुतो यातो मार्गेणानेन पश्यत॥ ३५॥
अनुयोगऽसमर्थान्या नितम्बभरमन्थरा।

या गन्तव्ये get याति निम्नपादाग्रसंस्थिति:॥ ३६॥
हस्तन्यस्ताग्रहस्तेयं तेन याति तथा सखि।
अनायत्तपदन्यासा लक्ष्यते पदपद्भति:॥ ३७॥
नैरास्यमन्दगामिन्या निवृत्तं लक्ष्यते पदम्।। ३८॥

Here Damodara has gathered flowers from
on high, for we see alone the impressions of
the tips of his feet. Here a nymph has sat down
with him, ornamented with flowers, fortunate
in having propitiated Visnu in a prior
existence. Having left her in an arrogant
mood, because he had offered her flowers, the
son of Nanda has gone by this road; for see,
unable to follow him with equal steps, his
associate has here tripped along upon her toes
and holding his hand the damsel has passed, as
is evident from the uneven and intermingled
footsteps. But the rogue has merely taken her
hand, and left her neglected, for here the paces
indicate the path of a person in despair.

नूनमुक्ता त्वरामीति पुनरेष्यामि त्तेऽन्तिकम्।
at कृष्णेन Aer त्वरिता पदपद्धति:।॥ ३ ९॥
