BOOK V, CHAP. 38

527

2. It is merely said in the Mahabharata that
Vasudeva expired; on which four of his wives burnt
themselves.

3. The Kali age commenced from the death of
Krsna, according to the usual notions; but it is
commonly supposed to commence a little later, or
with the reign of Pariksit.

4. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in
excepting the temple of Dvarak4, and asserting that
it still remains, in direct contradiction of the
Mahabharata, which declares that the sea did not
spare any part whatever. It is clear, therefore, that
when the latter was compiled the temple was not
standing, and that it was erected between the date
of thé compilation and that of the two Puranas. The
present shrine, which is held in great repute, stands
at the extremity of the peninsula of Guzerat. It is
still an object of pilgrimage; it was so in the reign
of Akbar (Ayin Akbari); and has been so, on doubt,
from a remote period. The image formerly
worshipped there was carried off 600 years ago,
and this was most probably subsequent to the date
of both the Puranas; for the idol was a form of Krs
na, called Rana chor, a popular divinity, unknown
in the Pauranik pantheon. Another image was
substituted in place of that which was taken away.
Notwithstanding the testimony of our text. and that

of the Bhagavata, the originality of the temple is
disputed, and a place thirty miles south from
Porbandar is said to be the spot where Dvarak4 was
swallowed up by the ocean. Hamilton, from
Macmurdo, &c. 1.662, .

5. The country of the five rivers. the Punjab:
rather an out of the way route from Dvarka to
Delhi.

6. Abhiras mean ‘herds’, and they are afterwards
called by Arjuna, Gopdlas, “‘Herdsmen’. The
pastoral. tribes of the west of India, and particularly
those of Afghanistan, almost always combine the
character of freebooter with that of shepherd.°

7. The Principal wives of Krsna, however,
according to the Mahabharata, escaped. The
occurrence is described there much in the same
way, but more briefly. It is not detailed in the
Bhagavata.

8. A name of Vyasa.

9. The story of Ashtavakra is related in the
Mahabharata. He was the son of Kahora, who
neglecting his wife, was rebuked for it by his yet
unborn son. The father angrily cursed him, that he
should be born bent in every part; and he was
accordingly brought forth crooked (vakra) in eight
limbs (ashta). He became nevertheless a celebrated
sage. See also Hindu Theatre, 1.293, note.

END OF THE FIFTH BOOK
