BOOK III, CHAP. 7

245

these are captives in the chains of acts and at
the end of their existence become slaves to the
power of Yama, by whom they are sentenced
to painful punishments. Released from these
inflictions, they are again born in the condition
of gods, men or the like; and thus living
beings, as the SAstras apprise us, perpetually
revolve. Now the question I have to ask and
which you are so well able to answer, is, by
what acts men may free themselves from
subjection to Yama?

WITT sata
अयमेव WT! प्रश्नो नकुलेन महात्मना।
पृष्ट: पितामह: wre भीष्मो यत् तच्छृणुष्व Wc
Paragara said— This question, excellent
Muni, was once asked by Nakula’ of his

grandfather Bhisma; and IJ will repeat to you
the reply made by the latter.

et उवाच
पुरा समागतो वत्स! सखा कालिङ्गको द्विज:।
स मामुवाच पृष्टो वै wear जातिस्मरो मुनि:॥९॥

तेनाख्यातमिदञ्चेनमित्यञ्चैतद् भविष्यति।

Ta च त्तदभूद् Beg! wah तेन धीमता।। १०॥।

स पृष्टश्च मया भूय: श्रद्दधानवतां द्विज:।

ag यदाह न तद् दृष्टमन्यथा fe war क्वचित्।। ११॥

एकदा तु मया पृष्टं यदेतद् भवतोदितम्।

प्राह कलिङ्गको विप्र: स्मृत्वा तस्य मुनेर्वच:॥ १२॥

जातिस्मरेण कथितो रहस्य: परमो मम।

ay किङ्करयोर्योऽभूत् संवादस्तं ब्रवीम Fn १३॥

Bhisma said to the prince, "There formerly

came on a visit to me a friend of mine, a
Brahmana, from the Kalinga country, who told
me that he had once proposed this question to
a holy Muni, who retained the recollection of
his former births, by whom what was and what
will be, was accurately told. Being importuned
by me, who placed implicit faith in his words,
to repeat what that pious personage had
imparted to him, he at last communicated it to
me; and what he related I have never met with
elsewhere.

कालिङ्ग उवाच
स्वपुरुषमभिवीक्ष्य पाशहस्तं
वदति यम: किल तस्य कर्णमूले।
परिहर मधुसूदनप्रपन्नान्
प्रभुरहमन्यनृणां न वैष्णवानाम्॥ १४॥

"Having, then, on one occasion, put to him
the same question which you have asked, the
Kalinga Brahmana recalled the story that had
been told him by the Muni-the great mystery
that had been revealed to him by the pious
sage, who remembered his former existence-a
dialogue that occurred between Yama and one
of his ministers.

अहममरगणार्चितेन धात्रा
हरिगुरुवशगोऽस्मि न स्वतन्त्र:
प्रभवति संयमने ममापि विष्णु:।। १५॥

कनकमभेदमपीष्यते यथैकम्।
सुरपशुमनुजादिकल्नाभिर्हर-

रखिलाभिरुदीर्य्यते तथैक:॥ १६॥
क्षित्तिजलपरमाणवोऽनिलान्ते

पुनरपि यान्ति यथैकतां धरित्र्य:।

सुरपशुमनुजादयस्तथान्ते
गुणकलुषेण सनातनेन तेन।। १७॥
हरिममरगणाचिताञघ्रिपद्मं

प्रणमति a: परमार्थतो fe wet:
तमरपरगातसमस्तपापबन्धं

ae परिहृत्य यथाग्निमाज्यसिक्तम्॥ १८॥

"Yama beholding one of his servants with
his noose in his hand, whispered to him and
said, "Keep clear of the worshippers of
Madhusidana. I am the lord of all men, the
Vaisnavas excepted. I was appointed by
Brahma, who is reverenced by all the
immortals, to restrain mankind and regulate
the consequences of good and evil in the
universe. But he who obeys Hari, as_ his
spiritual guide, is here independent of me; for
Visnu is of power to govern and control me.
