BOOK IV, 19

9, Atimara or Atibhara : Bhagavata. Antinara ;
Matsya. Matinara Mahabharata, Agni and
Brahma. According to the Matsya and Hari Varmsa
(not in the Brahma Purana), Gauri the daughter of
this prince, was the mother of Mandhatri, of the
family of Iksvaku.

10. In place of these the Matsya has
Amirttirayas and Nrcandra and there are several
varieties in the nomenclature. In place of the first
we have Vasu or Trasu, Vayu; Tansurogha, Agni;
Tansurodha, Brahma; and Sumati, Bhagavata.
Pratiratha is read for the second of the Agni and
Brahma; and for the third, Suratha, Agni; Subahu,
Hari Varhga.

11. Medhatithi is the author of many hymns in
the Rgveda and we have therefore Brahmanas and
religious teachers descended from Ksatriyas.

12. Malina Vayu. Raibhya Bhagavata.
Dharmanetra: Brahma Purana. The Hari Varhsa
omits him, making sad blundering work of the
whole passage. Thus the construction is such as to
intimate that Tafsu or Tarisurodha had a wife
named []4, the daughter of Medhatithi; that is, his
brother's great- granddaughter
मेधातिथिस्मुतस्तस्य......इला नाम तु यस्यासीत् कव्या वै जनमेजय।
ब्रह्मवादिन्यपि स्त्री च तंपुस्तामभ्यगच्छत।। but this, as the
commentator observes, is contrary to common
sense (अर्थकत्वादयुक्तं) and he would read it therefore,
इली नाम यस्यासीत्कन्या। ‘The daughter of him who was
named Ilin,' a Raja so called : but in the Vayu and
Matsya we have Ilind, the daughter of Yama,
married to Tarisu and mother of Malina or Anila;
more correctly perhaps Ailina : इलिना तु यमस्यासीत्कन्या
सा जनयत् सुतम्। त्रसो (तंसो) सुदयितं पुत्रं मलिनं ब्रह्मवादिनं।
sera ततो at चतुरस्त्विलिनात्मजात्। सुष्यन्तंमिति।। The
blunder of the Hari Varnga therefore arises from the
compiler's reading Yasya, ‘of whom’, instead of
Yamasya, Yama’. It is not an error of transcription,
for the metre requires Yasya and the remark of the
commentator proves the correctness of the reading.
The name occurs Tlina (ईलिन), the son of Tansu, in
the Mahabharata, agreeably to the Anuvansga sloka,
which is there quoted. 'Sarasvati bore Tafisu to
Matinara and Tansu begot a son, Ilina, by Kalingt :’
a सरस्वतीपुत्रं मतिनारादजीजनत्। ईलिनं जनयामास कालिंग्यां
तंसुरात्मजं।।

13. The Vayu, Matsya and Bhagavata agree with
out text in making these the grandsons of Tanisu :
even the Brahma Purana concurs, but the Hari

381

Varnsa makes them his sons, having apparently
transformed Tanisosuta (रंसो सुत:), the son of Tarisu,
into a synonym of Tarisu or Tarisurodha as in these
parallel passages : तंसो सुतोऽथराजर्षिर्धर्म्मनेत्र: प्रतापवान्।
उपदानवी ततो पुत्रान् चतुरोऽजनयच्छुभान्।। 'The son of Tansu
was the illustrious sage Dharmanetra : Upadanavi
had from him four excellent sons.’ Brahma Purana
तंसुरोधोऽथराजर्षि daha: प्रतापवान्। उपदा नवी सुतान् लेमे
चतुरस्तंसुरोधत:।। 'Tasurodha was a royal sage, the
illustrious institution of laws. Upadanavi had four
sons from Tarsurodha.' Hari Varhbsa. The
commentator explains Dharmanetra (धर्म्मनेत्र) to be
‘institution of laws' (धर्म्मप्रवर्त्तक:) We have
Upadanavi before, as the daughter of Vrsaparvan
the Daitya, married to Hiranyaksa. Homilton
(Buchanan) calls her the wife of Sughora. The four
sons are named in other authorities, with some
variations : Dusyanta, Susyanta or Rsyanta or
Sumanta, Pravira and Angaha or Naya. The
Mahabharata enumerates five, Dusyanta, Sara,
Bhima, Vasu and Pravasu, but makes them the sons
of Ilina and grandson of Tarisu.

14. These two Slokas are taken from the
Mahabharata. Adi Parvan and are part of the
testimony borne by a heavenly messenger to the
birth of Bharata. They are repeated in the same
book, in the account of the family of Puru. They
occur, with a slight variation of the order, in other
Puranas, as the Vayu, etc., and show the greater
antiquity of the story of Sakuntala, although they
do not narrate it. The meaning of the name Bharata
is differently explained in Sakuntala; he is said to
be so called from ‘supporting’ the world : he is also
there named Sarvadamana, 'the conqueror of all.’

15. The Brahma Purdna and Hari Varga, the
latter especially, appear to have modified this
legend, with the view perhaps of reconciling those
circumstances which are related of Bharadvaja as a
sage with his history as a king. While therefore they
state that Bharadvaja was brought by the winds of
Bharata, they state that he was so brought to
perform a sacrifice by which a son was born, whom
Bharadvaja also inaugurated धर्म्मसंक्रमणं चापि
मरुद्भिर्भरताय वै। अयाजयद्भरद्वाजो महद्भि: क्रतुभिर्हितं। पूर्वं तु वितथे
तस्य कृते PRA ततोऽर्थ विंतथो नाम भरद्वाजात् सुतोऽभवत्।।
In the Vayu, Matsya and Agni, however, the story
is much more consistently narrated; and
Bharadvaja, being abandoned by his natural parent,
is brought by the winds, as a child, not as sage; and
