434

ब्रह्माद्यैरच्चर्यते दिव्यैर्यश्च पुष्पानुलेषनै:।

नन्दनादिसमुद्भूतै: सोऽरच्च्यते वा कथं मया।। ६४॥

यस्यावताररूपाणि देवराज: सदार्च्चति।

न वेत्ति परमं रूपं सोऽर्च्यते वा कथं TAME GI

विषयेभ्य: समाहृत्य सर्वाक्षाणि च योगिन:।

समर्च्चयति ध्यानेन सोऽच्चर्यते वा कथं मया।।६६॥

ele ages age ध्यानेनार्चन्ति योगिन:।

भावपुष्पादिना Aa! Biswas वा कथं मया॥६७॥

When they had thus spoken, the Naga
himself, almost examinate, repeated feebly
their solicitations for mercy. ‘Forgive me,” he
murmured. ‘‘O god of gods! How shall I
address you, who are possesscd, through your
own strength and essence, of the eight great
faculties, in energy unequalled? You are the
supreme, the progenitor of the supreme
(Brahma) : you are the supreme spirit and
from you the supreme procecds : you are
bcyond all finite objects; how can I speak your
praise? How can IJ dcclare his greatness, from
whom come Brahma, Rudra, Candra, Indra,
the Maruts, the Asvins, the Vasus and Adityas;
of whom the whole world is an infinitely small
portion, a portion destined to represent his
cssence; and whose nature, primitive or
derived, Brahma and the immortals do not
comprehend? How can I approach him, to
whom the gods offer incense and flowers
culled from the groves of Nandana; whose
incarnatc forms the king of the deities ever
adores unconscious of his real person; whom
the sages, that have withdrawn their senses
from all external objects, worship in thought
and enshrining his image in the purposes of
their hearts, present to it the flowers of
sanctity?"

सोऽहं ते देवदेवेश! नार्च्चनायां स्तुतौ न च।

सामर्थ्यवान् कृपामात्र-मनोव्रृत्ति: wate AUG ci

सर्पजातिरियं क्रूरा यस्यां जातोऽस्मि केशव।

ततस्वभावोऽयमत्रास्ति नापराधो ममाच्युत।। ६९॥

सृज्यते भवता सर्वं तथा संहरयते जगत्।

THE VISNU-PURANAM

जाति-रूप-स्वाभावश्च सृज्यन्ते जगतां त्वया॥७०॥
यथाहं भवता सृष्टो जात्या रूपेण चेश्वर।

स्वभावेन च संयुक्तस्तथेदं चेष्टितं AA ७ १॥
यदन्यथा wala देवदेव! wat मयि।

न्याय्यो दण्डनिपातो वै तवैव वचनं यथा॥७२॥
तथापि यज्जगत्स्वामी दण्डं पातितवान् मयि।

स सोढोऽयं at दण्डस्त्वत्तो नान्यत्र मे वर:॥७३॥
eadteat हतविषो दमितोऽहं त्वयाच्युत।

Wad दीयतामेकमाज्ञापय करोमि किम्॥७४॥

I am quite unable, 0 god of gods, to
worship or to hymn you. Your own clemency
must alone influence your mind to show me
compassion. It is the nature of snakes to be
savage and I am born of their kind : hence this
is my nature, not minc offence. The world is
created, as it is destroyed, by you; and the
Species, form and nature of all things in the
world are your work. Evcn such as you have
crcated me in kind, in form and in nature, such
I am. and such are my actions : should I act
differently, then indeed should I deserve your
punishment, for so you have declared’. Yet
that I have been punished by you is indeed a
blessing; for punishment from you alone is a
favour. Behold I am now without strength,
without poison; deprived of both by you.
Spare me my life; J ask no more. Command
me what I shall do.”

श्रीभगवानुवाच।

नान्र स्थेयं त्वया wa! कदाचिद् यमुनाजले।

सभृत्यपरिवारस्त्वं समुद्रसलिलं व्रज॥७५॥

मत्पदानि च ते सर्प! दृष्ट्वा मूर्द्धनि सागरे।

Tes: पन्नगरिपुस्त्वयि न प्रहरिष्यति।।७६॥

Being thus addressed by Kaliya, Krsna
replied, ‘“You must not tarry here, nor any
where in the stream of the Yamund; depart
immediately, with your family and followers,
to the sea; where Garuda, the foe of the

serpent race, will not harm you, when he sees
the impressions of my feet upon your brow.”’
