BOOK I, CHAP. 20

to the great spirit again and again: to him who
is without name or shape; who sole is to be
known by adoration; whom, in the forms
manifested in his descents upon earth, the
dwellers in heaven adore; for they behold not
his inscrutable nature.

योऽन्तस्तिष्ठन्नशेषस्य पश्यतीश: शुभाशुभम्।

तं सर्वसाक्षिणां विष्णुं नमस्ये परमेश्वरम्।। ८ BIL

नमोऽस्तु विष्णवे तस्मै यस्याभिन्नमिदं जगत्।

ध्येय: स जगतामाद्य: प्रसीदतु ममाव्यय:॥ ८ २॥

यत्रोतमेतत् प्रोतञ्च विश्वमक्षरमव्ययम्।

आधारभूत: सर्वस्य स प्रसीदतु मे हरि:॥८३॥
नमोऽस्तु विष्णवे तस्मै नमस्तस्मै पुन: पुन:।

wa wd aa: सर्वं य: सर्वं सर्वसंश्रय:।। ८४॥
`सर्वगत्वादनन्तस्य स एवाहमवस्थित:।

मत्त: सर्वमहं ea मयि सर्वं सनातने।। ८५॥
अहमेवाक्षयो नित्य: परमात्मात्मसंश्रय:।
ब्रह्मसंज्ञोऽहमेवाग्रे TAA च पर: पुमान्।। ८ ६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे एकोनविंशोऽध्याय:।

I glorify the supreme deity Visnu. the
universal witness, who seated internally,
beholds the good and ill of all. Glory to that
Visnu from whom this world is not distinct.
May he, ever to be meditated -upon as the
beginning of the universe have compassion
upon me: may he, the supporter of all, in
whom every thing is warped and woven’,
undecaying. imperishable, have compassion
upon me. Glory, again and again, to that being
to whom all returns, from whom all proceeds;
who is all, and in whom all things are: to him
whom | also am; for he is every where; and
through whom all things are from me. I am all
things: all things are in me, who am
everlasting. I am undecayable, ever enduring,
the receptacle of the spirit of the supreme.
Brahma is my name; the supreme soul, that is
before all things, that is after the end of all.
NOTES

1. These are the four Upayas. 'means of success,’
specified in the Amara-kosa साम

दानमित्युपायचतुष्टयं।

125

2. Celebrated Daityas. Brhaspati is one of the
chief Danavas, or sons of Danu, and appointed king
over them by Brahma. Rahu was the son of
Simhika, more known as the dragon's head. or
ascending node, being a chief agent in eclipses.
Bali was sovereign of the three worlds in the time
of the dwarf incarnation, and afterwards monarch
of Patala.

3. With Nagapasas, "snake-nooses:’ tortuous and
twining round the limbs like serpents.

4. Acts of devotion——sacrifices, oblations,
observance of rules of purification, alms-giving,
and the like—opposed to ascetic and contemplative
worship, which dispenses with the ritual.

5. Havya and Kavya. oblations of ghee or oiled
butler; the former presented to the gods, the latter
to the Pitrs.

6. Mahat, the first product of nature, intellect.

7, The preceding passage was addressed to the
Purusa. or spiritual nature, of the supreme being : .
this is addressed to his material essence, his other
energy, अपराशक्ति: | that is, to Pradhana.

8. Or rather, ‘woven as the warp and woof;' यत्रोतं
प्रोतं विश्वं--उत meaning wovea by the long threads,
and We ‘by the cross threads.’

५९५९ १९ १९
