68

THE VISNU-PURANAM

6. The Bhatgavata reads Karmasrestha. Variyas.
and Sahisnu. The Vayu and Linga have Kardama
and Ambarisa in place of the two first, and add
Vanakapivat and a daughter. Pivari. married to
Vedasiras (see note I). Kardama married Sruti (note
4), and had by her Sankhapada, one of the
Lokapalas, and a daughter. Kamy&, married to
Priyavrata (note 6. Ch. VII.). Vana-kapivat, also
read Dhana-k. and Ghana-k., had a son, Sahisnu.
married to Yasodhara. and they were the parents of
Kamadeva.

7. The different authorities agree in this place.
The Vayu adds two daughters, Punya and Sumati,
matried to Yajfiavama (sce note 2).

8. The Bhagavata has an entirely different set of
names, or Citraketu. Surocis, Virajas, Mitra.
Ulwana, Vasubhridyéna. and Dyumat. It also
specifics Saktri and others, as the issue of a
different marriage. Thc Vayu and Linga have the
same sons as in our text, reading Putra and Hasta in
place of Gatra : they add a daughter. Pundarika,
matried to Pandu (see note I). The eldest son,
according to the Vayu. espoused a daughter of
Markandeya, and had by her the Lokapala of the
west. Kelumat. The seven sons of Vasistha are
termed in the text the seven Rsis. appearing in that
character in the third Manvantara.

9. The eldest son of Brahma, according to the
commentator, upon the authority of the Vedas:

श्रुते:। The Vayu Purana
enters into a very long detail of the names and
places of the whole forty-nine fires. According to
that. also. Pavaka is electric or Vaidyuta fire;
Pavamana is that produced by friction, or
Nirmathya; and Suci is solar. Saura, fire. Pavamana
was the parent of Kavya-vahana, the fire of the
Pitrs; Suci of Havyavahana. the fire of the gods;
and Pavamdana of Sahasraksu. the fire of the Asuras.
The Bhagavata explains these different fires to be
so many appellations of fire employed in the
invocations with which different oblations to fire
are offered in the ritual of the Vedas : वैतानिके कर्म्मणि
यत्रामभिब्रर्ह्यवादिभि:। आग्नेय्य इष्टयो aa निरूप्यन्तेऽग्नयस्तु ते।
explained by the commentator, af कर्म्मणि यज्ञे येषां
नामभिरग्निदेवताका इष्टयो निरूंप्यन्ते क्रियन्ते तत्र त अग्नियो न
लौकिका:।

10. According to the commentator, this
distinction is derived from the Vedas. The first
class, or Agnisvattas. consists of those house-
holders who, when alive, did not maintain their

domestic fires, nor offer bumnt-sacrifices: the
second, of those who kept up the household flame,
and presented oblations with fire. Manu calls thcse
Agnidagdhas and the reverse, which Jones renders,
‘consumable by fire,’ etc. Kullika Bhatta gives no
explanation of them. The Bhagavata adds other
classes of Pitrs; or, the Ajyapas, ‘drinkers of ghee;’
and 'Somapas. ‘drinkers of the acid juice.” The
commentator, explaining the meaning of the terms
Sagnayas and Anagnyas, has,

साग्नय: तद्रहिता स्त्वनग्नय:। which might be understood
to signify, that the Pitrs who are ‘without fire, are
those to whom oblations are not offered; and those
‘with fire, arc they to whom oblations are presented.

ll. The Vayu carries this genealogy forward.
Dharani was married to Meru, and had by him
Mandara and three daughters. Niyati, Ayati, and
Vela: the two first ».ere married to Dhitri and
Vidhatri (p. 69). Vela was the wife of Samudra, by
whom she had Samudri, married to Pracinavarhis,
and the mother of the ten Pracetasas, the fathers of
Daksa, as subsequently narrated. Mena was matried
to Himavat, and was the mother of Mainaka, and of
Ganga. and of Parvati or Uma.

12. No notice is here taken of Sati. married to
Bhava, as is intimated in Ch. VIII, when describing
the Rudras. Of these genealogies the fullest and
apparently the oldest account is given in the Vayu
Purana : as far as that of our text extends, the two
nearly agree, allowing for differences of appellation
originating in inaccurate transcription, the names
frequently varying in different copies of the same
work, leaving it doubful which reading should be
preferred. The Bhagavata. as observed above (Ch.
VII, n. 12), has created some further perplexity by
substituting. as the wives of the patriarchs, the
daughters of Kardama for those of Daksa. Of the
general statement it may be observed, that although
in some respects allegorical, as in the names of the
wives of the Rsis (Ch. VII.); and in others
astronomical, as in the denominations of the
daughters of Angiras (Ch. X.). yet it seems
probable that it is not altogether fabulous, but that
the persons in some instances had a real existence,
the genealogies originating in imperfectly
preserved traditions of the families of the first
teachers of the Hindu religion, and of the descent of
individuals who took an active share in its
propagation.

KEKE
