BOOK IE, CHAP. 11

201

ॠचस्तपन्ति पूर्वाह्णे मध्याह्नेऽथ यजूंषि वै।
बृहद्रथन्तरादीनि सामान्यह्नं क्षये Tat १०॥
अङ्गमेषा त्रयी विष्णोर्ऋग्यजु:सामसंज्ञिता।
विष्णुशक्तिरवस्थानं सदादित्ये करोति ari een

Paradsara replied— I will explain to you,
Maitreya, the subject of your inquiry. The sun,
though identified with the seven being in his
orb, is distinct from them as their chief. The
entire and mighty energy of Visnu, which is
called the tree Vedas, or Rk, Yajush, and
Saman, is that which enlightens the world, and
destroys its iniquity. It is that also which,
during the continuance of things, is present as
Visnu, actively engaged in the preservation of
the universe, and abiding as the three Vedas
within the sun. The solar luminatry, that
appears in every month, is nothing else than
that very supreme energy of Visnu which is
composed of the three Vedas, influencing the
motions of the planet; for the Rks (the hymns
of the Rig-veda) shine in the morning, the
prayers of the Yajus at noon, and the
Brhadrathantara and other portions of the
Saman in the afternoon. This triple
impersonation of Visnu, distinguished by the
titles of the three Vedas, is the energy of Vis
nu, which influences the positions of the sun’.

न hae tat शक्तिर्वैष्णवी सा त्रयीमयी।

TENT पुरुषो रुद्रस्त्रयमेतत् त्रयीमयम्॥ १२॥
रुद्र: साममयोऽन्ताय तस्मात्त् तस्थाशुचिर्ध्वनि:।। १३॥
एवं सा सात्विकी शक्तिर्वैष्णवी या त्रयीमयी।
आत्मसप्तगणस्थं तं भास्वन्तमधितिष्ठति।। १४॥

But this triple energy of Visnu is not
limited to the sun alone, for Brahma, Purusha
(Visnu), and Rudra are also made up of the
same triform essence. In creation it is Brahma,
consisting of the Rg-Veda; in preservation it is
Visnu, composed of the Yajur-veda; and in
destruction Rudra, formed of the Sama-veda,
the utterance of which is consequently
inauspicious.”

तया चाधिष्ठित: सोऽपि जाज्वलीति स्वरश्मिभि:।

तम: समस्तजगतां नाशं नयति चाखिलम्॥ १५॥
स्तुवन्ति तं वै मुनयो गन्धर्वैर्गीयते पुर:।
नृत्यन्त्योऽप्सरसो यान्ति तस्य चानु निशाचरा:। १६॥
वहन्ति पन्नगा यक्षै: क्रियतेऽभीषुसङ्गृह:।
बालखिल्यास्तथैवैनं परिवार्य समासते।। १७॥

नोदेता नास्तमेता च कदाचिच्छक्तिरूपधृक्।
विष्णुर्विष्णो: पृथक् तस्य गण: सप्तमयोऽप्ययम्।। १८॥
स्तम्मस्थदर्पणस्येव योऽयमासन्नतां गत:।
छायादर्शनसंयोगं स तं प्रापोत्यथात्मन:॥ १९॥

एवं सा वैष्णवी शक्तिर्नैवापैति ततो द्विज!
भासानुमासं भास्वन्तमध्यास्ते तत्र संस्थितम्।। २०॥
पितॄ-देव-मनुष्यादीन् स सदाप्याययन् प्रभु:।

Thus the energy of Visnu, made up of the
three Vedas, and derived from the property of
goodness, presides in the sun, along with the
seven beings belonging to it; and through the
presence of this power the planet shines with
intense radiance, dispersing with his beams the
darkness that spreads over the whole world :
and hence the Munis praise him, the quiristers
and nymphs of heaven sing and dance before
him, and fierce spirits and holy sages attend
upon his path. Visnu, in the form of his active
energy, never either rises or sets, and is at
once the sevenfold sun and distinct from it. In
the same manner as a man approaching a
mirror, placed upon a stand, beholds in it his
own image, so the energy (or reflection) of Vis
nu is never disjoined (from the sun’s car,
which is the stand of the mirror), but remains
month by month in the sun (as in the mirror),
which is there stationed.

`परिवर्त्तत्यहोरात्रकारणं सविता द्विज।। २१॥
सूर्यरश्मि: सुषुष्णोयस्तर्पितस्वेनचन्द्रपा:।
कृष्णपक्षॆऽमरै: शश्वत् पीयते वै सुधामय:।। २२॥
पीतं तद्द्विकलं सोमं कृष्णपक्षक्षये fe!
पिबन्ति पितर: शेषं भास्करात् तर्पेणं तथा।। २३॥
तमुत्सृजति भूतानां पुष्ट्यर्थं wre २४॥
aa प्रीणात्यशेषाणि भूतानि भगवान् रवि:।
