BOOK I, CHAP. 16

~ CHAPTER 16

षोडशोऽध्याय:

(मैत्रेयस्य प्रह्लादचरितविषयक: प्रश्न:।)
मैत्रेय उवाच
कथितो भवता वंशो मानवानां महामुने।
कारणञ्चास्य जगतो विष्णुरेव सनातन:।॥ १॥
यच्चैतद् भगवानाह प्रह्लादं दैत्यसत्तमम्।
ददाह नाग्निर्नास्त्रैश्च क्षुण्णस्तत्याज जीवितम्॥ २॥
जगाम वसुधा क्षोभं प्रह्लादे सलिले स्थिते।
बन्धबद्धे विचलति विक्षिप्ताङ्गै: समाहता।। ३॥
शैलैराक्रान्तदेहोऽपि न ममार च य: पुरा।
त्वयैवातीव माहात्म्यं कथितं यस्य धीमत:।।४॥
तस्य प्रभावमतुलं विष्णोर्भक्तिमतो मुने।
श्रोतुमिच्छामि यस्यैतच्चरितं दीप्ततेजस:॥ ५॥
fa निमित्तमसौ शस्त्रैविक्षतो दितिजैर्मुने।
किमर्थञ्चाब्धिसलिले निक्षिप्तो धर्मतत्पर:।। ६॥
आक्रान्त: पर्वतै: कस्मात् कस्माददष्टो महोरगे:।
क्षिप्त: किमद्रिशिखरात् fa वा पावकसञ्चये।७॥
दिग्दन्तिनां दन्तभूमिं स च कस्मान्निरूपित:।
संशोषकोऽनिलश्चास्य प्रयुक्त: किं महासुरै:।। ८॥।
कृत्याञ्च दैत्यगुरवो युयुजुस्तत्र किं मुने।
शम्बरश्चापि मायानां सहस्रं किं प्रयुक्तवान्।। ९॥
हालाहलं विषमहो दैत्यसूदैर्महात्मन:।
कस्माद् दत्तं विनाशाय aq जीर्णं तेन धीमता।। १०॥
Maitreya said—Venerable Muni, you have
described to me the races of human beings and
the eternal Visnu, the cause of this world; but
who was this mighty Prahlada, whc whom you
have last spoken; whom fire could not burn;
who died not, when pierced by weapons; at
whose presence in the waters earth trembled,
shaken by his movements, even though in
bonds; and who, overwhelmed with rocks,
remained unhurt. I am desirous to bear an
account of the unequalled might of that sage

worshipper of Visnu, to whose marvellous
history you have alluded. Why was he assailed

107

by the weapons of the sons of Diti ? why was
so righteous a person thrown into the sea?
wherefore was he overwhelmed with rocks?
why bitten by venomous snakes? why hurled
from the mountain crest? why cast into the
flames? why was he made a mark for the tusks
of the clephants of the spheres ? wherefore
was the blast of death directed against him by
the enemies of the gods? why did the priests of
the Daityas practise ceremonies for his
destruction; why were the thousand illusions
of Samvara exercised upon him? and for what
purpose was deadly poison administered to
him by the servants of the king, but which was
innocuous as food to his sagacious son?

एतत् सर्वं महाभाग प्रह्लादस्य महात्मन:।

चरितं श्रोतुमिच्छामि महामाहात्म्यसूचकम्।। ११॥
न हि कौतुहलं aa ag दैत्यैर्न हतो fe स:।
अनन्यमनसो विष्णो क: शक्नोति निपातने।। १२॥
तस्मिन् धर्मपरे fet केशवाराधानोद्यते।
स्ववंशप्रभवैर्दैत्यै: Gey द्वेषोऽतिदुष्कर:॥ १३॥
धर्मात्मनि महाभागे विष्णुभक्ते विमत्सरे।

दैतेयै: wed यस्मात् तन्ममाख्यातुमर्हसि।। १४॥
प्रहरन्ति महात्मानो विपक्षा अपि नेदृशे।

गुणै: समन्विते साधौ fee पुनर्य: स्वपक्षज:॥ १५॥
तदेतत् कथ्यतां we विस्तरान्मुनिसत्तम।
दैत्येश्वरस्य चरितं श्रोतुमिच्छाम्यशेषत:। १६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे षोडशोऽध्याय:।

All this I am anxious to hear: the history of
the magnanimous Prahlada; a legend of great
marvels. Not that it is a wonder that he should
have been uninjured by the Daityas; for who
can injure the man that fixes his whole heart
on Visnu? but it is strange that such inveterate
hatred should have been shown, by his own
sin, to one so virtuous, so unweariedly

‘occupied in worshipping Visnu. You can

explain to me for what reason the sons of Diti
offered violence to one so pious, so illustrious,
so attached to Visnu, so free from guile.
Generous enemies wage no war with such as
he was, full of sanctity and every excellence;
