BOOK IV, 12

357

धृति:। कोशिकस्यापि चेदि: पुत्रोऽभूत, यस्य सन्ततौ चैद्या . Or articles the best of their kind; seven

भूषपाला:। क्रथस्य स्नुषापुत्रस्थ पुत्र: कुन्तिरभवत्।। १५॥
कुन्तेवृष्णि:) वृष्णोर्निर्वृति:,निर्वतेर्दशार्ह: ततश्च व्योमा
तस्मादपि जीमूत:) तस्यापि वंशकृति:, adt भीमरथ:),
तस्माद् नवरथ:, ततश्च दशरथ: TA शकुनि:, AAA:
करमभि:, करम्भेर्देवरातोऽभवत्। तस्माद् देवक्षत्र:, तस्य
WY: मधोरनवरथ:, अनवरथात् कुरुवत्स:, ततश्चानुरथ:),
तत: पुरुहोत्रो जज्ञे। Ta sigs, ततश्च सत्वत: सत्वादेते
सात्वता:॥ १६॥
सर्वमापै: प्रमुच्यते।। १७॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे greg: अध्याय:॥

They had three sons, Kratha, Kaigika'* and
Romapada’®. The son of Romapada was
Babhru’’ and his son was Dhrti'’. The son of
Kaisika was Cedi, whose descendants were
called the Caidya kings'’®. The son of Kratha
was Kunti!’; his son was Vrsni’’; his son was
Nirvrti’; his son was Dagarha; his son was
Vyoman; his son was Jimita; his son was
Vikrti”; his son was Bhimaratha; his son was
Navaratha”; his son was Dasgaratha”*; his son
was Sakuni; his son was Karambhi; his son
was Devarata; his son was Devaksatra”’; his
son was Madhu”: his son was Anavaratha; his
son was Kuruvatsa; his son was Anuratha; his
son was Puruhotra; his son was Ansu; his son
was Satvata, from whom the princes of this
house were termed Sdtvatas. This was the
progeny of Jyaémagha; by listening to the
account of whom, a man is purified from his

sons.
eek

NOTES

I. In the Brahma Purana and Hari Varhga we
have two families from Krostri; one which is much
the same as that of the text; the other makes short
work of a long story, as we shall again notice.

2. Vajravat : Korma.

3. Santi : Karma. Svaha ; Matsya. Triganku ;
Linga.

4, Visinsu : Agni. Rsabha : Linga. Kusika ;
Karma. Ruseku : Bhagavata.

animate and seven inanimate; a wife, a priest, a
general, a charioteer, a horse, an elephant and a
body of foot soldiers; or instead of the last three, an
executioner, an economist, a reader of the Vedas;
and a chariot, an umbrella, a jewel, a sword, a
shield, a banner and a treasure,

6. The text states this in plain prose, but the
Vayu quotes a verse which makes out but a
hundred hundred or 10,000 sons : श्लोकोयं 7a:
`पुराविदै:। शशबिब्दोस्तुपुत्राणां शतानामभवच्छतं। धीमतामनुरूपानां
भूरिद्रविणतेजसां।।

7. The Matsya has the first, third and fifth of our
text and Prthudharma, Prthukirtti and Prthumat.
The Kirma has also six names, but makes as many
successions.

8. Suyajfia : Agni, Brahma, Matsya. Dharma :
Bhagavata.

9. Usat : Brahma, Hari Vamé§a.

10. Sitiksu ; Agni. Sineyus ; Brahma. Punyjit ;
Bhagavata. The Vayu has Maruta and
Kambalavarhis, brothers, instead.

11. Considerable variety prevails here. The
Brahma and Hari Varhnsa have Marutta the Rajarsi
(a gross blunder, see Bk. Ch. IV. Ch. J,
Kambalavarhis, Sataprasiti, Rukmakavaca : the
Agni-Marutta, Kambalavarhis, Rukmesu : while the
Bhagavata makes Rucaka son of Usanas and father
to the five princes who in the text are the grandsons
of Rukmakavaca.

12. The Bhagavata has Rukmesu, Rukman,
Jyamagha, Prthu and Purujit. The Vayu reads the
two last names Parigha and Hari. The Brahma and
Hari VarhSa insert Parajit as the father of the five
named as in the text.

13. Most of the other authorities mention that the
elder of the five brothers, Rukmesu, succeeded his
father in the sovereignty; and that the second,
Prhurukman, remained in his brother's service.
Palita and Harita were set over Videha (विदेहेषु
frarraq! Linga) or Tirhut and Jyamagha went forth
to settle where he might : according to the Vayu he
conquered Madhyadesa (the country along the
Narmada), Mekala and the Suktimat mountains. So
the Brahma Purana states that he established
himself along the Riksavat mountain and dwelt in
Suktimati. He names his son, as we shall, see
Vidarbha : the country so called is Berar and
amongst his descendants we have the Caidyas or
