३08

The prince replied, "Let this your Indra, the
monarch of the spheres, the god of a hundred
sacrifices, consent to carry me upon his
shoulders and I will wage battle with your
adversaries as your ally." The gods and Indra
readily answered, "So be it"; and the latter
assuming the shape of a bull, the prince
mounted upon his shoulder. Being then filled
with delight and invigorated by the power of
the eternal ruler of all movable and immovable
things, he destroyed in the battle that ensued
all the enemies of the gods; and because he
annihilated the demon host while seated upon
the shoulder (or the hump, Kakud) of the bull,
he then obtained the appellation Kakutstha

(seated on the hump”).

SPOT: YAS अनेनस: पृथु:,
पृथोर्विश्वगश्व:) तस्य चाद्रेऽभूत्, अर्द्रस्य युवनाश्व: तस्य
श्रावस्त:,। य: श्रावस्तीं पुरीं निवेशयामास। श्रावस्तस्य

तस्य च समस्ता एव पुत्रा धाघुमुखनिश्वासाग्मि विप्लुष्टा
faery १२॥

दृढाश्वाद् वार्य्यश्च:, were निकुम्भ:, निकुम्भात् संहताश्व:,
ततश्च कृशाश्व:, तस्मात् प्रसेनजित्, ततो युवनाश्वोऽभवत्।

The son of Kakutstha was Anenas,'? whose
son was Prthu, whose son was Visvagasva,
whose son was Ardra,'° whose son was
Yuvanasva, whose son was Sravasta, by whom
the city of Sravasti’® was founded. The son of
Sravasta was Brhadasva, whose son was
Kuvalayasva. This princc, inspired with the
spirit of Visnu, destroyed the Asura Dhundhu,
who had harassed the pious sage Uttanka; and
he was then entitled Dhundhumara.'’ In his
conflict with the demon the king was attended
by his sons, to thc number of twenty-one
thousand; and all these, with the exception of
only three, pcrished in the engagement,
consumed by the fiery breath of Dhundhu. The
three who survived were Drdhasva, Candrasva

| Reread मामयं धास्यतीति।

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and Kapilaésva; and the son and successor of
the elder of these was HaryyaSva; his son was
Nikumbha; his son was SanhataSva; his son

was Krsasva; his son was Frasenajit, and his
son was another Yuvandsva.'*

तस्य चापुत्रस्यातिनिर्वेदाद् मुनीनामाश्रममण्डले निवसत:
कृपालुभिस्तैर्मुनिभिरपत्योत्पादनाय इष्टि: कृता। wee
मध्यरात्रे निवृत्तायां मन्त्रपूतजलपूर्णकलसं वेदिमध्ये निवेश्य
ते मुनय: सुषुपु:।। १३॥

तेषु त सुप्तेषु अतीव तृट्परीत: स भूपालस्तमाश्रमं
fade, सुप्तांश्च तानृषीन् नैवोत्यापयामास।। १४॥

wa कलसजलमपरिमेयमाहात्म्यं मन्त्रपूतं पपौ प्रबुद्धाश्च
ऋॠषय: पप्रच्छु:, केनैतन्मन्त्रपूतं वारि पीतम्? om fe पीते
राज्ञोस्य युवनाश्वस्य पत्नी महाबलपराक्रमं पुत्र जनयिष्यति।
इत्याकर्ण्य स राजा अजानता मया पीतमित्याह।। १५॥

गर्भश्च युवनाश्वोदरेऽभवत् WATT च sae प्राप्तसमयश्च
दक्षिणं कुक्षिमवनीपतेर्निर्भिद्य निश्चक्राम न ut राजा
FATT १६॥

जातो नामैष कं धास्यतीति ते मुनय: प्रोचु:। अथागम्य
ततो मान्धाता
नामतोऽभवत्, ath, चास्य प्रदेशिनी देवराजेन न्यस्ता, ai
पपौ। ताञ्जामृतस्राविणीमासाद्य पीत्वा चाह्नैव व्यवर्द्धत। स तु
भान्धाता चक्रवर्ती सप्तद्वीपां wel बुभुजे। भवति चात्र
श्लोक:-

यावत् सूर्य्य उदेति स्म यावच्च प्रतितिष्ठति। ad aq
यौवनाश्वस्य मान्धातु: क्षेत्रमुच्यते।। १७॥

Yuvanagva had no son, at which he was
deeply grieved. While residing in the vicinage
of the holy Munis, he inspired them with pity
for his childless condition and they instituted a
religious rite to procure him progeny. One
night during its performance the sages having
placed a vessel of consecrated water upon the
altar had retired to repose. It was past
midnight, when the king awoke, exceedingly
thirsty; and unwilling to disturb any of the
holy inmates of the dwelling, he looked about
for something to drink. In his search he come
to the water in the jar, which had been
sanctified and endowed with prolific efficacy
by sacred texts and he drank it. When the
