BOOK Ii, CHAP. 5

वीणावेणुमृदङ्गानां स्वनास्तूर्याणि च द्विज।। ११॥
एतान्यन्यानि चोदारभाग्यभोग्यानि दानवै:।
दैत्योरगैश्च भुज्यन्ते पातालान्तरगोचरै:॥ १२॥

There are beautiful groves and streams and
lakes where the lotus blows; and the skies are
resonant with the Koil's song. Spendied
ornaments, fragrant perfumes, rich unguents,
the blended music of the lute and pope and
tabor; these and many other enjoyments are
the common portion of the Danavas, Daityas,
and snake-gods, who inhabit the regions of
Patala.’

पातालानामधश्चास्ते विष्णोर्या तामसी तनु:।

VOTE यद्गुणान् वक्तुं न शक्ता दैत्यदानवा:॥ १३॥
योऽनन्त: पठ्यते सिद्धैर्देवी देवरषिपूजित:।

स सहस्रशिरा व्यक्तस्वस्तिकामलभूषण:।। १४॥
फणामणिसहस्रेण य: स विद्योतयन् दिश:।

सर्वान् करोति निर्वीर्यान् हिताय जगतोऽसुरान्।। १५॥
मदाघूर्णितनेत्रोऽसौ य: सदैवैककुण्डल:।

किरीटी स्रग्धरो भाति साम्नि: श्वेत इवाचल:।॥ १६॥
नीलवासा मदोत्सिक्त: श्वेतहारोपशोभित:।
साभ्रगङ्गाप्रवाहोऽसौ कैलासाद्रिरिवोन्नत:।। १७॥
लाङ्गलासक्तहस्ताग्रो बिभ्रन्मुषलमुत्तमम्।

उपास्यते स्वयं कान्त्या यो वारुण्या च AMAT १८॥
कल्पान्ते यस्य वक्तेभ्यो विषानलशिखोज्ज्वल:।
सङ्कर्षणात्मको रुद्रो निष्कम्यात्ति STEAL १९॥

Below the seven Patalas is the form of Vis
nu, proceeding from the quality of darkness,
which is called Sesa*. the excellencies of
which neither Daityas nor Danavas can fully
enumerate. This being is called Ananta by the
spirits of heaven, and is worshipped by sages
and by gods. He has a thousand heads, which
are embellished with the pure and visible
mystic sign’: and the thousand Jewels in his
crests give light to all the regions. For the
benefit of the world he deprives the Asuras of
their strength. He rolls his eyes fiercely, as if
intoxicated. He wears a single ear-ring, a
diadem, and wreath upon each brow; and
shines like the white mountains topped with

175

flame. He is clothed in purple raiment, and
ornamented with a white necklace, and looks
like another Kailasa, with the heavenly Ganga
flowing down its precipices. In one hand he
holds a plough, and in the other a pestle; and
he is attended by V4aruni (the goddess of
wine), who is his own embodied radiance.
From his mouths, at the end of the Kalpa,
proceeds the venomed fire that, impersonated
as Rudra, who is one with Balarama, devours
the three worlds.

स बिभ्रच्छेखरीभूतमशेषक्षितिमण्डलम्।

आस्ते पातालमूलस्थ: शेषोऽशेषसुराचित:।॥ २०॥
शेखरीभूतं मुकुटवत् Fra २०॥

तस्य ad प्रभावञ्च स्वरूपं रूपमेव च।

न fe वर्णयितुं शक्यं arg वा त्रिदशैरपि।। 2 aii
यस्यैषा सकला पृथ्वी फणामणिशिखारुणा।
आस्ते कुसुममालेव कस्तद्वीर्यं वदिष्यति॥ २ २॥
यदा विजृम्भतेऽनन्तो मदाघूर्णितलोचन:।

तदा चलति भूरेषा साद्रितोयाब्धिकानना॥ २३॥
गन्धर्वाप्सरस: सिद्धा: किन्नरोरगचारणा:।

नान्तं गुणानां गच्छन्ति तेनानन्तोऽयमव्यय:।। २४॥
यस्य नागवधूहस्तैर्लगितं हरिचन्दनम्।

मुहु: श्वासानिलापास्तं याति दिक्षूदवासताम्। २५॥

Sesa bears the entire world, like a diadem,
upon his bead, and he is the foundation on
which the seven Patalas rest. His power, his
glory, his form, his nature, cannot be
described, cannot be comprehended by the
gods themselves. Who shall recount his might,
who wears this whole earth, like a garland of
flowers, tinged of a purple dye by the radiance
of the jewels of his crests. When Ananta, his
eyes rolling with intoxication, yawns, then
earth, with all her woods, and mountains, and
seas, and rivers, trembles. Gandharvas,
Apsarasas, Siddhas. Kinnaras, Uragas and
Charanas are unequal to hymn his praises, and
therefore he is called the infinite (Ananta), the
imperishable. The sandal paste, that is ground
by the wives of the snake-gods, is scattered
