292

THE VISNU-PURANAM

युक्तिमद् aet ग्राह्यं मयान्यैश्च भवद्विधै:।। २९॥
मायामोहेन ते दैत्या प्रकारैर्बहुभिस्तथा।
व्युत्थापिता यथा नैषां त्रयीं कश्चिदरोचयत्।। ३०॥

If that which is eaten by one at a Sraddha
gives satisfaction to another, it must be
unnecessary for one who resides at a distance
to bring food for presentation in person."*
“First, then let it be determined what may be
(rational) believed by mankind and then," said
their preceptor, "you will find that felicity may
be expected from my instructions. The words
of authority do not, mighty Asuras, fall from
heaven : the text that has reason is alone to be
acknowledged by me and by such as you are."”
By such and similar lessons the Daityas were
perverted, so that not one of them admitted the
authority of the Vedas.

इत्थमुन्मार्गयातेषु दैत्येषु तेषु तेऽमरा:।
उद्योग परमं कृत्वा युद्धाय समुपस्थिता:॥ ३ १॥
ततो देवासुरं युद्धं पुनरेवाभवद द्विज!

हताश्च तेऽसुरा देवै: सन्मार्भपरिपन्थिन:॥ ३ २॥

स्वधर्मकवचस्तेषामभूद् य: प्रथमं द्विज!

तेन रक्षाभवत् पूर्वं AME च तत्र ते।। ३३॥

When the Daityas had thus declined from
the path of the holy writings, the deities took
courage and gathered together for battle.
Hostilities accordingly were renewed, but the
demons were now defeated and slain by the
gods, who had adhered to the righteous path.
The armour of religion, which had formerly
protected the Daityas, had been discarded by
them and upon its abandonment followed their
destruction.*

ततो मैत्रेय! तन्मार्गवर्तिनो येऽभवञ्जना:।
नग्नास्ते तैर्यतस्त्यक्तं त्रयीसंवरणं FAT ३४॥
ब्रह्मचारी गृहस्थश्च वानप्रस्थस्तथाश्रमा:।
परिव्राड वा चतुर्थोऽत्र पञ्चमो नोपपद्यते।। ३५॥
यस्तु सन्त्यज्य गार्हरथ्यं वानप्रस्थो न जायते।
परिव्राड् वापि मैत्रेय! स नग्न: पापकृन्नर:।। ३६॥

Thus, Maitreya, you are to understand that
thosc who have seceded from their original

belief are said to be naked, because they have
thrown off the garment of Vedas. According to
the law there are four conditions or orders of
men (of the three first castes), the religious
student, the householder, the hermit and the
mendicant. There is no fifth state; and the
unrighteous man who relinquishes the order of
the householder and does not become either an
anchorite or a mendicant, is also a naked
(seceder).

नित्यानां कर्मणां विप्र! तस्य हानिरहर्निशम्।

अकुर्वन् विहितं कर्म शक्त: पतति तद्दिने॥। ३७॥

प्रायश्चित्तेन महता शुद्धिमाप्नोत्यनापदि।

uel नित्यक्रियाहाने: eral मैत्रेय! मानव:॥३८॥

The man who neglects his permanent
observances for one day and night, being able
to perform them, incurs thereby sin for one
day; and should he omit them, not being in
trouble or a fortnight, he can be purified only
by arduous expiation.

तस्यावलोकनात् सूर्यो निरीक्ष्य: साधुभि: सदा।। ३९॥
Be स्नानं सचेलस्य शुद्धेर्हेतुर्महामते!
पुंसो भवति तस्योक्ता न शुद्धि: पापकर्मण:।। ४०॥

देवर्षिपितृभूतानि यस्य नि:श्वस्य वेश्मनि।
प्रयान्त्यनचितान्यत्र लोके तस्मान्न पापकृत्।। ४१॥

The virtuous must stop to gaze upon the
sun after looking upon a person who has
allowed a year to elapse without the
observance of the perpetual ceremonies; and
they must bathe with their cloths on should
they have touched him : but for the individual
himself no expiation has been declared. There
is no sinner upon earth more culpable than one
in whose dwelling the gods, progenitors and
spirits, are left to sigh unworshipped.

देवादिनि:श्वासहतं शरीरं यस्य वेश्म च।

न तेन सङ्करं sale गृहासनपरिच्छदै:॥।४२॥
जायते तुल्यता तस्य तेनैव द्विज! वत्सरम्॥४३॥
अथ भुङ्क्ते गृहे तस्य करोत्यास्यां तथासने।
