508

THE VISNU-PURANAM

चक्रमेतत् समुत्सृष्टं गदेयं ते विसर्जिता।

गरुत्मानेष fae: समारोहतु ते ध्वजम्।। २३॥

He then said to the former, who was
foolishly wearing his emblems, “Paundraka,
you desired me by your envoy to resign to you
all my insignia. I now deliver them to you.
Here is my discus; here I give up my mace;
and here is Garuda, let him mount upon thy
standard.”

WIM उवाच

इत्युच्चार्च्य विमुक्तेन चक्रेणासौ विदारित:।

पोथितो गदया भग्नो गरुत्मांश्च गरुत्मता ॥२४॥

ततो हाहाकृते लोके काशिपुर्च्यधिपो बली।

aaa वासुदेवेन मित्रस्यापचितौ स्थित:। २५॥

aa: शार्ङ्गधनुर्मुक्तैश्छित्त्वा तस्य शरै: शिर:।
काशिपुर्य्यञ्च चिक्षेप कुर्वन् लोकस्य विस्मयम्॥ २६॥
हत्वा च पौण्ड्रकं शौरि: काशिराजञ्च सानुगम्।
पुनर्द्दरवतीं प्राप्तो रेमे स्वर्गगतो यथा॥ २७॥

Thus speaking, he let fly the discus and the
mace, by which Paundraka was cut to pieces,
and cast on the ground; whilst the Garuda on
his banner was demolished by the Garuda of
Visnu. The people, beholding this sight,
exclaimed, “Alas! alas!” but the valiant king
of Kasi, adhering to the imposture of his
friend, continued the confict, till Sauri
decapitated him with his arrows, shooting his
head into the city of Kasi, to the marvel of all
the inhabitants. Having thus slain Paundraka
and the king of Kasi, with all their followers,
Sauri returned to Dvaraka, where he lived in
the enjoyment of heavenly delights.

तच्छिर: पतितं quar aa काशिपते: पुरे।

wa: किमेतदित्याह केनेत्यत्यन्तविस्मित: ॥ २८॥
Wea त्तं वासुदेवेन हतं तस्य सुतस्तत:।
पुरोहितेन सहितस्तोषयामास शङ्करम् ।। २९॥
at वृणीष्वेति तदा तं प्रोवाच नॄपात्मजम्।। ३०॥
स वव्रे भगवान् कृत्या पितृहन्तुर्वधाय मे।
समुत्तिष्ठतु कृष्णस्य त्वत्प्रसादान्महेश्वर।। ३ १॥।

When the inhabitants of Kasi saw the head
of their king shot into their, city, they were
much astonished, and wondered how it could
have happened, and by whom the deed could
have been done. Having ascertained that the
king had been killed by Krsna, the son of the
monarch of Kasi* together with the priest of
the family, propitiated Sankara; and that deity,
well pleased to be adored in the sacred place
Avimukta, desired the prince to demand a
boon: on which he prayed, and said, "O lord,
mighty god, through thy favour let thy mystic
spirit arise to destroy Krsna, the murderer of
my father.”

पराशर उवाच
एवं भविष्यतीत्युक्तै दक्षिणाग्नेरनन्तरम्।
महाकृत्या समुत्तस्थौ तस्यैवाग्नेर्विनाशिनी।। ३ २॥
ततो ज्वालाकरालास्या ज्वलत्केशकलापिका।
कृष्ण कृष्णेति कुपिता कृत्या द्वारवतीं ययौ ॥३३॥
तामवेक्ष्य जनस्त्रासविचल्लोचनो मुने।
ययौ PROS जगतां शरणं मधुसूदनम्।। ३४॥
काशिराचसुतेनेयमाराध्य वृषभध्वजम्।
उत्पादिता महाकृत्येत्यवगम्याथ चक्रिणा ॥ ३५॥
we कृत्यामिमामुग्रां वह्निज्वालाजटालकाम्।
चक्रमुत्सुष्टक्षेपु क्रीडासक्तेन लीलया॥ ३६॥
तदग्निमालाजटिलज्वालोद्गारातिभीषणाम्।
कृत्यामनुजगामाशु विष्णुचक्रं सुदर्शनम् ॥३७॥
चक्रप्रतापविध्वस्ता कृत्या माहेश्वरी तदा।
ननाश वेगिनी वेगात् तदप्यनुजगाम ATTN ३८॥
कृत्या वाराणसीमेव प्रवेविश त्वरान्विता।
विष्णुचक्रप्रतिहतप्रभावा मुनिसत्तम ।।३९॥

“Tt shall be so,” answered Sankara: and
from out of the southern fire upsprang a vast
and formidable female,” like flame out of fire,
blazing with ruddy light, and with fiery
radiance streaming amidst her hair. Angrily
she called) upon Krsna, and departed to
Dvarakaé; where the people, beholding her,
were struck with dismay, and fled for
protection to Madhustidana, the refuge of all
