BOOK IV, 10

विश्वाच्या सहोपभोगं भुक्त्वा कामानामन्तमवाप्स्यामी-
त्यनुदिनं तन्मनस्को बभूव।। ७॥

He then applied successively to Druhyu,
Turvasu and Anu and demanded of them their
juvenile vigour. They all refused and were in
consequence cursed by the king. Lastly he
made the same request of Sarmistha's
youngest son, Puru, who bowed to his father
and readily consented to give him his youth
and receive in exchange Yayati's infirmities,
saying that his father had conferred upon him
a great favour.

The king Yayati being thus endowed with
renovated youth, conducted the affairs of state
for the good of his people, enjoying such
pleasures as were suited to his age and
strength and were not incompatible with
virtue. He formed a connection with the
celestial nymph Visvaéci and was wholly
attached to her and conccived no end to his
desires.

अनुदिनञ्जच उपभोगतश्च कामानतीव रम्यान् AA ८॥।
ततश्चैवमगायत्।

ययातिरुवाच।
न जातु काम: कामानामुपभोगेन शाम्यति।
हविषा porate भूय एवाभिवर्द्धते।। ९॥
एकस्यापि न पर्याप्तं तदित्यतितृषं त्यजेत्।। १०॥
यदा न Hed भावं सर्वभूतेषु पापकम्।
समदृष्टेस्तदा Ya: सर्वा wa Gat दिश:॥ Va
या ढुस्त्यजा दुर्मतिभिर्या न जीर्यति जीर्य्यत:।
तां तृष्णां सन्त्यजन् We: सुखेनैवाभिपूर्यते।। १२॥
जीर्यन्ति जीर्यत: केशा दन्ता जीर्यन्ति जीर्यत:।
धनाशा जीविताशा च जीर्यतोऽपि न जीर्यति।। १३॥

The more they were gratified, the more
ardent they became; as it is said in this verse,
"Desire is not appeased by enjoyment; fire fed
with sacrificial oil becomes but the more
intense. No one has ever more than enough of
rice or barley or gold or cattle, or women;
abandon therefore inordinate desire. When a

351

mind finds neither good nor ill in all objects,
but looks on all with an equal eye, then
everything yields it pleasure. The wise man is
filled with happiness, who escapes from
desire, which the feeble-minded can with
difficulty relinquish an which grows not old
with the aged. The hair becomes grey, the
teeth fall out, as man advances in years; but
the love of wealth, the love of life, are not
impaired by age."

पूर्णवर्षसहस्रं मे विषयासक्तचेतस:।

तथाप्यनुदिनं तृष्णा ममैतेष्वेव जायते।। १४॥

तस्मादेतामहं त्यक्त्वा ब्रह्मण्याधाय मानसम्।

Prasat निर्ममो भूत्वा चरिष्यामि git: we १५॥

"A thousand years have passed," reflected
Yayati, "and my mind is still devoted to
pleasure; every day my desires are awakened
by new objects. I will therefore now renounce
all sensual enjoyment and fix my mind upon
spiritual truth. Unaffected by the alternatives
of pleasure and pain and having nothing I may
call my own, I will henceforth roam the forests
with the deer."

पराशरं Sara

पूरो: सकाशादादाय जरां दत्त्वा च यौवनम्।

राज्येऽभिषिच्य yes प्रययौ तपसे SAT १६॥

दिशि दक्षिणपूर्वस्यां तुर्व्वसुं प्रत्यथादिशत्।

प्रतीच्याञ्च तथा द्रुह्युं दक्षिणापथतो यदुम्।। १७॥

उदीच्याञ्च war कृत्वा मण्डलिनो नृपान्।

सर्वपृथ्वीपतिं पूरुं सोऽभिषिच्य वनं ययौ।। १८॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे दशम: अध्याय:।

Having made this determination, Yayati
restored his youth to Puru, resumed his own
decrepitude, installed his youngest son in the
sovercignty and departed to the wood of
penance (Tapovana).*. To Turvasu he
consigned he south-east districts of his
kingdom; the west to Druhyu; the south to
Yadu; and the north to Anu; to govern as
viceroys under their younger brother Puru,

whom he appointed supreme monarch of the
earth.”
