BOOK II, CHAP. 12

203

radiant sun supplies the moon, when reduced
by the draughts of the gods to a single Kala,
with a single ray; and in the same proportion
as the ruler of the night was exhausted by the
celestials, it is replenished by the sun, the
plunderer of the waters: for the gods,
Maitreya, drink the nectar and ambrosia
accumulated in the moon during half the
month, and from this being their food they are
immortal. Thirty-six thousand three hundred
and thirth-three divinities drink the lunar
ambrosia. When two digits remain, the moon
enters the orbit of the sun, and abides in the
ray called Ama; whence the period is termed
Améavasya.

wat वीरुत्सु वसति प्रयात्यर्क तत: क्रमात्।। ९॥
छिनत्ति वीरुधो यस्तु वीरुत्संस्थे निशाकरे।
पत्रं वा पातयत्येकं ब्रह्महत्यां स विन्दति॥ १०॥
SY पञ्चदशे art किञ्चिच्छिष्टे कलात्मके।
अपराह्णे पितृगणा जघन्यं पर्य्यपासते।

पिबन्ति द्विकलाकारं शिष्टां तस्य कला तु या।
सुधामृतमयी quar तामिन्दो: पितरो मुने।। १२॥
नि:सृतं तदमावस्यां गभस्तिभ्य: सुधामृतम्।
मासं तृप्तिमवाप्याग्र्यां पितर: सन्ति निर्वृता:।
सौभ्या बर्हिषदश्चैव अग्निष्वात्ताश्च ते त्रिधा॥ १३॥
एवं देवान् सिते पक्षे कृष्णपक्षे wor पितॄन्।
वीरुधश्चामृतमयै: शीतैरप्परमाणुभि:।। १४॥
वीरुधोषधिनिष्पत्त्या मनुष्य-पशु-कीटकान्।
आप्याययति शीतांशु: प्रकाशाह्लादनेन FU १५॥

In that orbit the moon is immersed for a
day and night in the water; thence it enters the
branches and shoots of the trees; and thence
goes to the sun. Consequently any one who
cuts off a branch, or casts down a leaf, when
the moon is in the trees (the day of its rising
invisible), is guilty of Brahmanicide. When the
remaining portion of the moon consists of but
a fifteenth part, the progenitors approach it in
the afternoon, and drink the last portion, that
sacred Kala which is composed of ambrosia,

and contained in the two digits of the form of
the moon.” Having drunk the nectar effused by
the lunar rays on the day of conjunction, the
progenitors are satisfied, and remain tranquil
for the ensuing month. These progenitors (or
Pitrs) are of three classes, termed Saumyas,
Varhisuadas, and Agnisvattas.° In this manner
the moon, with its cooling rays, nourishes the
gods in the light fortnight, the Pitrs in the dark
fortnight; vegetables, with the cool nectary
aqueous atoms it sheds upon them; and
through their development it sustains men,
animals, and insects; at the same time
gratifying them by its radiance.

वाय्वग्निद्रवसम्भूतो रथश्चन्द्रसुत्तस्य च।
पिषङ्गैस्तुरमैर्युक्त: सोऽष्टाभिर्वायुवेगिभि:। १६॥
सवस्थ: सानुकर्षो युक्तो भूसम्भवैर्हयै:।
सोपासङ्गपताकस्तु शुक्रस्यापि रथो महान्॥ you
अष्टास्रि: काञ्चन: श्रीमान् भौमस्यापि wi महान्।
पद्मरागारुणैरश्चै: संयुक्तो वह्निसम्भवै:। १८॥
अष्टाभि: पाण्डरैर्युक्तो वाजिभि: काञ्चनो रथ।
ततस्मिंस्तिष्ठति वर्षान्ते राशौ राशौ बृहस्पति:।। १९॥
MSTA: शबलै: स्यन्दनं युतम्।
ATG wrtatife मन्दगामी शनैश्चर:॥र॰॥
स्वर्भानोस्तुरगा wet भृङ्गाभा घूसरं रथम्।
सकृद्युक्तास्तु मैत्रेय! वहन्त्यविरतं wan २१॥
आदित्यान्नि:सृतो राहु: सोमं गच्छति पर्वसु।
आदित्यमेति सोमाच्च पुन: सौरेषु एर्वसु॥ २२॥
तथा केतुरथस्याश्वा अप्यष्टौ वातरंहस:।
पतलालघूमवर्णाभा लाक्षारसनिभासुणा:॥ २३॥

The chariot of the son of Candra, Budha or
Mercury, is composed of the elementary
substances air and fire, and is drawn by eight
bay horses of the speed of the wind. The vast
car of Sukra (Venus) is drawn by earth-born
horses,’ is equipped with a protecting fender
and a floor, armed with arrows, and decorated
by a banner. The splendid car of Bhauma
(Mars) is of an octagonal shape, drawn by

eight horses, of a ruby red, sprung from fire
Vrihaspati (Jupiter), in a golden car drawn by
