BOOK I, CHAP. 8

53

abroad, may not have been prepared in vain.’ So
let it be,’ replied Hara, the subduer of Iudra. And
thereupon Daksa knelt down upon the earth, and
praised gracefully the author of righteousness, the
three-eyed god Mahadeva, repeating the eight
thousand, names of the deity whose emblem is a
bull."

NOTES

1. The sacrifice of Daksa is a legend of some
interest, from its historical and archaeological
relations. It is obviously intendcd to intimate a
struggle between the worshippers of Siva and of
Visnu, in which at first the latter, but finally the
former, acquired the ascendancy. It is also a
favourite subject of Hindu sclupture, at least with
the Hindus of the Saiva division, and makes a
conspicuous figure both at Elephanta and Ellora, A
representation of the dispersion and multilation of
the gods and sages by Virabhadra. at the former, is
published in the Archeologia, VII. 326. where it is
described as the Judgement of Solomon! a figure of
Virabhadra is given by Niebuhr, vol. II. tab. 10:
and the entire group in the Bombay Transactions,
vol.l. p. 220. It is described, p. 229; but Erskine
has not verified the subject, although in cannot
admit of doubt The groupe described. p. 224,
probably represents the introductory details given
in our text. Of the Ellora sculptures, a striking one
occurs in what Sir C. Malet calls the Doomar Leyna
cave, where is "Veer Budder. with eight hands. In
one is suspended the slain Rajah Dutz,” A. R. VI,
396. And there is also a representation of 'Ehr
Budr,' in one of the colonadcs of Kailasa;'being, in
fact, the same figure as that at Elephanta. Bombay
Tr. Ill, 287. The legend of Daksa therefore was
popular when those cavern temples were excavated.
The story is told in much more detail in several
other Puranas, and with some variations, which will
be noticed: but the above has been selected as a
specimen of the style.of the Vayu Purana. and as
being a narration which, from its inartifical,
obscure, tautological, and  uncircumstantial
construction, is probably of an ancient date. The
same legend, in the same words, is given in the
Brahma Purana

2. Or this may be understood to imply, that the
original story is in the Vedas; the term being, as
usual in such a reference, इति fd: 1 Gangadvara. the
place where the Ganges descends to the plains—or
Haridvar. as it is more usually termed—is usually

specified as the scene of action. The Liga is more
precise, calling it Kanakbala, which is the village
still called Kankhal, near Haridvar (Megha Duttft, p.
59). It rather inaccurately, however, describes this
as upon Harnsa peak;, a point of the Himalaya:
हंसशृङ्गे हिमवच्छिखरे।

3. The Kiirma Purana gives also this discussion
between Dadhicha and Daksa, and their dialogue
contains some curious matter. Daksa, for instance,
states that no portion of a sacrifice is ever allotted
to Siva, and no prayers are directed to be addressed
to him, or to his bride: सर्व्वष्वेव हि यज्ञेषु न भाग:
परिकल्पित:। न मन्त्रा भार्य्यया सार्द्ध शंकरस्येति नेष्यते। Dadhicha
apparently evades the objection, and claims a share
for Rudra, consisting of the triad of gods, as one
with the sun, who is undoubtedly hymned by the
several ministering priests of the Vedas: स स्तूयते
सहस्राशुं सामगाध्वर्यहोतृभि:। पश्यैनं fasemntet we मूर्ततित्रयीमयं।
Daksa replies, that the twelve Adityas receive
special oblations : that they are all the suns; and
that he knows of no other. The Munis, who
overbear the dispute, concur in his sentiments: य एते
द्वादशादित्या आदित्ययज्ञभागिन:। | wet gat इति नह्यन्यो विद्यते
रवि:। एवमुक्ते तु मुनय: समायाता दिदृक्षव:। बाढमिल्यन्रुवन् दक्षं
तस्य साहाय्यकारिणा:॥ These notions seem to have been
exchanged for others in the days of the Padma
Purdna and Bhagavata. as they place Daksa's
neglect of Siva to the latter's filthy practices, his
going naked, smearing himself with ashes, carrying
a skull, and behaving as if he were drunk or crazed:
alluding, no doubt, to the practices of Saiva
mendicants, who seem to have abounded in the
days of Sankaricharya, and since, there is no
discussion in the Bhagavata. but Rudra is described
as present at a former assembly, when his father-in-
law censured him before the guests, and in conse-
quence he departed in a age. His follower Nandi
curses the company, and Bhrgu retorts in language
descriptive of the Vamacharis, or left hand
worshippers of Siva. “May all those” he says, “who
adopt the worship of Bhava (Siva), all those who
follow the practices of his worshippers, become
heretics, and oppugners of holy doctrines; may they
neglect the observances of purification; may they
be of infirm intellects. wearing clotted hair. and
ornamenting themselves with ashes and bones: and
may they enter the Saiva initiation, in which
spirituous liquor is the libation."
