6 THE VISNU-PURANAM

_imperishable’ Purusottama;® who is one with
true wisdom, as truly known;’ eternal and
incorrupt; and who is known through false
appcarances by the nature of visible objects:*
having bowed to Visnu, the destroyer, and lord
of creation and preservation; the ruler of the

CHAPTER 2
द्वितीयोऽध्याय:
(विष्णुस्तुति:, सृष्टिप्रक्रिया a)

Id b i ishabl d । I

world; unborn, imperishable, undecaying:

अविकाराय शुद्धाय नित्याय परमात्मने। will relate to you that which was originally
सदैकरूपरूपाय विष्णवे सर्वजिष्णवे।। १॥ imparted by the great rather of all (Brahma), in
ant fuanata aa wETT T answer to the questions of Daksa and other

venerable sages, and repeated by them to
Purukutsa, a king who reigned on the banks of
the Narmada. It was next related by him to
Sarasvata, and by Sarasvata to me.’

पर: पराणां परम: परमात्मात्मसंस्थित:।
रूपवर्णादिनिर्देशविशेषणविवर्जित:।। १०॥

वासुदेवाय ताराय सर्गस्थित्यन्तकारिणे।। २॥
श्लानेकत्वेरूण्यस्थूलसूक्ष्श्यानेक्म:।

अव्यक्तव्यक्तरूपाय विष्णवे मुक्तिहेतवे॥ ३॥
सर्गस्थितिविनाशानां जगतोऽस्य जगन्मय:।
मूलभूतो नमस्तस्मै विष्णवे परमात्मने।।४॥

Paragara said, Glory to the unchangeable, अपक्षयविनाशाभ्यां परिणामरद्धिजन्मभि:।
holy, eternal, supreme Visnu, of one universal वर्जित: शक्यते agi य: सदास्तीति केवलम्॥ ११॥
nature, the mighty over all : to him who is Sarai 36 वै यत्त:।

Hiranygarbha. Hari, and Sankara,’ the creator,
the preserver, and destroyer of the world: to
Vasudeva, the libcrator of his worshippers: to
him, whose essence is both single and
manifold; who is both subtile and corporeal,
indiscretc and discrete: to Visnu, the cause of
final emancipation.” Glory to the supreme Vis
nu, the cause of the creation, existence, and
end of this world; who is the root of the world,
and who consists of the world.’

आधारभूतं विश्वस्याप्यणीयांसमणीयसाम्।

प्रणम्य सर्वभूतस्थमच्युतं पुरुषोत्तमम्॥५॥

ज्ञानस्वरूपमत्यन्तनिर्म्मलं परमार्थत:।

तमेवार्थस्वरूषेण भ्रान्तिदर्शनत: स्थितम्।। ६॥

विष्णुं afer विश्वस्य स्थितौ सर्गे तथा प्रभुम्।

प्रणम्य जगत्तामीशमजमक्षरमव्ययम्।। ७॥

aa: स वासुदेवेति विद्वद्भि: परिपठ्यते।। १२॥
Agel परमं नित्यमजमक्षयमव्ययम्। ।
एकस्वरूपं च सदा Santas निर्मलम्।। १३॥
तदेतत् सर्वमेवासीद् व्यक्ताव्यक्तस्वरूंपवत्।

तथा पुरुषरूपेण कालरूपेण च स्थितम्।। १४॥
परस्य ब्रह्मणो रूपं पुरुष: wert fin
व्यक्ताव्यक्ते तथैवान्ये BT कालस्तथा परम्।। १५॥
प्रधानपुरुषव्यक्तकालानां परमं हि यत्।

षश्यन्ति सूरय: yas तद्विष्णो: परमं पदम्॥ १६॥
प्रधानपुरुषव्यक्तकालास्तु प्रविभागश:।

रूपाणि स्थितिसर्गान्तव्यक्तिसद्भावहेतव:।। १७॥
व्यक्तं विष्णुस्तथाव्यक्तं Yaa: काल Va च।
क्रीडतो बालकस्येव चेष्टां तस्य निशामय।। १८॥

कथयामि यथा Yet दक्षाद्यैर्भुनिसनपै:| Who can describe him who is not to be
apprehended by the senses: who is the best of

WB: Ware भगवानब्जयोनि: पितामह:॥ ८॥ ॥ :

. all things; the supreme soul, self-existent: who
तैश्चोक्तं पुरुकुत्साय भूभुजे नर्मदातटे। is devoid of all the distinguishing
सारस्वताय तेनापि Wal सारस्वतेन च।। ९॥ characteristics of complexion, caste, or the

~ Having glorified him who is the support of like; and is exempt from birth, vicissitude,
all things; who is the smallest of the small:' death, wos decay: who is always, and alone:
who is in all created things; the unchanged, who exists every where, and in whom all
