BOOK I, CHAP. 17

115

carat

मा यात तोषं प्रसभं ब्रवीमि।

सर्वत्र दैत्या: समतामुपेत
समत्वमाराधनमच्युतस्य।। ९ ०॥

afer प्रसन्ने किमिहास्त्यलभ्यं
धर्मार्थकामैरलमल्पकास्ते।

समाश्रिताद् ब्रह्मतरोरनन्ता-
न्नि:संशयं प्राप्स्यथ वै महत् फलम्।।९१॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे सप्तदशोऽध्याय:।

Verily I say unto you, that you shall have
no satisfaction in various revolutions through
this treacherous world, but that you will obtain
placidity for ever by propitiating Visnu, whose
adoration is perfect calm. What here is
difficult of attainment, when he is pleased ?
Wealth, pleasure, virtue, are things of little
moment. Precious is the fmut that you shall
gather, be assured, from the exhaustless store
of the tree of true wisdom."

॥ ek ye
NOTES

1. The boon, according to the Vayu Purana. was,
that he should not be slain by any created being :
the Kirma adds. except by Visnu. The Bhagavata
has a similar boon as the Vayu, and therefore, says
the commentator. Visnu assumed the form of the
NrSimha. as being that of neither a man oor an
animal.

2. The Puranas teach constantly incompatible
doctrines. According to this passage, the Supreme
Being is not the ioert cause of creation only.. but
exercises the functions of an active Providence. The
commentator quotes a text of the Veda in support
of this view: शास्ता जनानां Peale! Universal soul
entering into men, governs their conduct.’
Incongruities, however, are as frequent in the
Vedas as in the Puranas; but apparently the most
ancient parts of the Hindu ritual recognised an
active ruler in the Creator of the universe; the
notion of abstract deity originating with the schools
of philosophy.

3. This is the purport of the sentence apparently,
and is that which the comment in part confirms.
Literally it is. ‘A blow is the pleasure of those
whose eyes are darkened by ignorance, whose

limbs, exceedingly benumbed, desire.pleasure by
exercise, The commentator divides the sentence,
however, and reads it, 'As fatigue would be like
pleasure to paralyzed limbs; and a blow is
enjoyment to those who are blinded by delusion;
that is, by love; for to them a slap, or even a kick.
from a mistress would be a favour.’ It is not
improbably an allusion to some such venerable
pastime as blindman's buff. The interpretation,
however. leaves the contruction of the first half of
the sentence imperfect, unless the nominative and
verb apply to both portions : गानां
t भ्रान्तिज्ञानावृताक्षाणां प्रहारोऽपि सुखायते।

4. They are so far from being sources of pleasure
in themselves, that, under different contrasts, they
become sources of pain. Heat is agreeable in cold
weather : cold is agreeable in hot weather; heat
would then be disagreeable. Drink is pleasant to a
thirsty man ; thirst is agreeable to one who has
drunk too much; and.more drink would be painful.
So of food, and of other contrasts.

5. "Divine knowledge is the province only of
those who can separate soul from body : that is.
who live independent of bodily infirmities and
passions. We have not overcome corporeal
vicissitudes, and have therefore no concern with
such abstruse inquiries.’ This is the commentator's
explanation of the passage,

6. पिपासित:। Alluding, says the commentator, to
the fable of a washerman, who, whilst washing his
clothes in the Ganges, proposed daily to drink of its
waters, but forgot his purpose in his occupation : or
of a boy. who proposed the same as he pursued fish
after fish, and never accomplished his intention,
being engrossed by his sport : both died without
drinking.

7. The three kinds of affliction of the Samkya
philosophy : internal, as bodily or mental distress;
external, as injuries from men, animals etc.; and
superhuman, or inflictions by gods or demons. See
S. Karika, ver. 1.

8. The construction of the text is elliptical and
brief, but the sense is sufficiently clear. #4 भद्राणि
भूतानि हीन शक्तिरहंपरं। मुदं तथापि Heata हानिद्वेषफलं aa: |i The
order of the last pada is thus transposed by the
commentator ; यतो Sues हानिरेव फलं। ‘Whence (from
feeling pleasure) the abandonment of enmity is
verily the consequence.’
