16

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Vedanta than Sarhkhya. According to this notion,
the elements add to their characteristic properties
those of the elements which precede them. Akasa
has the single property of sound: air has those of
touch and sound: fire has colour, touch, and sound;
water has taste, colour. touch, and sound: and earth
has smell and the rest. thus having five properties:
or, as the Linga Purana describes the series, आकाशं
शब्दमात्रं यत् तत्स्पर्शमात्रमाविशत्। द्विगुणस्तु ततो ary:
शब्दस्पर्शात्मकोऽभवत्। रूपं तथैवाविशतां शब्दस्पर्शगुणावुभी।
fra ads: स शब्दस्पर्शरूपवान्। शब्दस्पर्शरूपमात्रं रसमात्रं
समाविशत्। तस्माच्चतुर्गुणा आपो विज्ञेयास्तु रसात्मिका:। शब्दस्पर्शश्च
रूपं च was गन्धमाविशत्। तस्मात् पंचगुणा भूमि: स्थूलभूतेषु
wera

25. Tanmitra, ‘rudiment, or ‘type,’ from Tad
‘that.’ for Tasmin ‘in that’ gross element, and mdtra
'subtile or rudimental form’ (मात्रासूक्ष्मं रूपं)। The
rudiments are also the. characteristic properties of
the elements: as the Bhagavata; तस्य मात्रा गुण: शब्दो
fag यद्दष्टदृश्ययो:। 'The rudiment of it (ethcr) is also its
quality, sound; as a common designation may
denote both a person who sees an object which is to
be seen.’ that is. according to the commentator,
suppose a person behind a wall called aloud, “An
elephant! an elephant!" the term would equally
indicate an elephant was visible, and that somebody
saw it, Bhag. I. 5.

26. The properties here alluded to arc not those
of goodness etc. but other properties assigned to
perceptible objects by the Sarnkhya doctrines, or
Santi. ‘placidity'; Ghorata, ‘terror; and Moha,
‘dulness’ or 'stupefaction.' v. Karika. v. 38. . 112.

27. The Bhagavata. which gives a similar
statement of the origin of the elements, senses, and
divinities, specifies the last to be Dis (space), air,
the sun, Pracetas, the ASvins, fire, Indra, Upendra.
Mitra, and Ka or Prajapati, presiding over the
senses, according to the comment, or severally over
the ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hands, feet,
and excretory and generative organs, Bhag. I. 5.
31.

28. Avyaktanugrahena. The expression is
somcthing equivocal, as Avyakta may here apply
either to the First Cause or to matter. In either case
the notion is the same, and the aggregation of the
clements is the effect of the presidence of spirit,
without any active interference of the indiscrete
principle The Avyakta is passive in the evolution
and combination of Mahat and the rest. Pradhana

is, no doubt, intended. but its identification with the
Supreme is also implied. The term Anugraha may
also refer to a classification of the order of creation,
which will be again adverted to.

29, It is impossible not to refer this notion to the
same origin as the widely diffused opinion of
antiquity, of the first manifestation of the world in
the form of an cgg. "It seems to have been a
favourite symbol, and very ancient, and we find it
adopted among many nations.’ Bryant, III. 165.
Traces of it occur amongst the Syrians. Persians’
and Egyptains; and besides the Orphic egg amongst
the Greeks, and that described by Aristophanes,
Téxtev part of the ceremony in the mpatiotov
vinveptov ४४६ 1] WeAQvontEpos Gv, part of the
ceremony in the Dionysiaca and other mysteries
consisted of the consecration of an egg; by which
according to Porphyry, was signified the world:
Epprvever 68 16 adv 6४ K6apov, Whether this
egg typified the ark. as Bryant and Faber suppose,
is not material to the proof of the antiquity and
wide diffusion of the belief that the world in the
beginning existed in such a figure. A similar
account of the first aggregation of the elements in
the form of an egg is given in all the Puranas, with
the usual epithet Haima or Hiranya, ‘golden.' as it
occurs in Manu, I. 9.

30. Here is another analogy to the doctrines of
antiquity relating to the mundane egg: and as the
first visible male being, who, as we shall hereafter
see, united in himself the nature of eithcr sex.
abode in the egg. and issued from it; so “this first-
bom of the world, whom they represented under
two shapes and characters, and who sprung from
the mundane egg, was the person from whom the
miortals and immortals were derived. He was the
same as Dionusus, whom they styled. पूर्वजमर्द्धनारीशं
त्रिगुणञ्च प्रजापतिं। अवाच्यं कृष्णमव्यक्तं ब्रह्माणं च द्विमूर्तिकं।।

31. Janarddana is derived from Jana, 'men,' and
Arddana. ‘worship; the ‘object of adoration to
mankind’.

32 This is the invariable doctrine of the Puranas.
diversificd only according to the individual divinity
to whom they ascribe idcntity with Paramdtman or
Parameévara. In our text this is Vishhu: in the Saiva
Puranas, as in the Linga. it is Siva: in the Brahma-
vaivartta it is Krsna. The identification of one of the
hypostases with the common source of the triad
was an incongruity not unknown to other
