288

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अष्टाविंशद्दयोपेतं agi तामसं तव।
उन्मार्गगामि सर्वात्मन् तस्मै। WH नम:॥२८॥

Glory to you, who are brute animals,
universal spirit that tends to perversity, which
proceeds from the quality of darkness and is
encumbered with the twenty-eight kinds of
obstructions.’

यज्ञाङ्गभूतं यद्रूपं जगत: सिद्धिसाधनम्।
वृक्षादिभेदैर्यद्भेदि तस्मै मुख्यात्मने नम:।। २९॥

Glory to you, who are that chief spirit
which is diversified in the vegetable world and
which, as the essence of sacrifice, is the
instrument of accomplishing the perfection of
the universe.

तिर्यङ्गानुषदेवादि व्योमशब्दादिकञ्च यत्।
रूपं तवादे: सर्वस्य तस्मै सर्वात्मने नम:॥३०॥

Glory to you, who are everything and
whose primeval form is the objects of
perception and heaven and animals and men
and gods.

यदन्यदस्मात् परमं परात्मन्।
त्तस्मै AT: कारणकारणाय।। ३१॥

Glory to you, who are the cause of causes,
the supreme spirit; who are distinct from us
and all beings composed of intelligence and
matter and the like and with whose primeval
nature there is nothing that can be compared.

मगोचरे यच्च विशेषणानाम्।
BUT तस्मै भगवन्। नता: STB २॥

We bow to you. O lord, who has neither
colour nor extension nor bulk nor any
predicable qualities; and whose essence, purest
of the pure, is appreciable only by holy sages.

wa: शरीरेषु यदन्यदेहे-

ष्वशेषजन्तुवजमव्ययं यत्।
यस्माच्च नान्यद्व्यतिरिक्तमस्ति

ब्रह्मस्वरूपाय AAT: स्म TAU ३३॥

We bow to you, in the nature of Brahman,
uncreated, undecaying; who are in our bodies
and in all other bodies and in all living
creatures and besides whom there is nothing
else.

सकलमिदमजस्य यस्य रूपं
परमपदात्मवत: सनातनस्य।
प्रभुममलं प्रणता: स्म वासुदेवम्॥३४॥

We glorify that Vasudeva, the sovereign
lord of all, who is without soil, the seed of all
things, exempt from dissolution, unborn,
eternal, being in essence the supreme
condition of spirit and in substance the whole
of this universe."

स्तोत्रस्यास्यावसाने ते ददृशु: षरमेश्वरम्।

शङ्खचक्रगदापाणि गरुडस्थं YU हरिम्।। ३५॥

तमूचु: सकला देवा: प्रणिपातपुर:सरम्।

प्रसीद देव:। दैत्येभ्यस्त्राहीति शरणार्थिन:।। ६६॥

त्रैलोक्यं यज्ञभागाश्च दैत्यैर्हादपुरोगमै:।

हृतं नो ब्रह्मणोऽप्याज्ञामुल्लङ्घ्य WATT ३७॥

यद्यप्यशेषभूतस्य वयं ते च तवांशका:।

तथाप्यविद्याभेदेन भिन्नं पश्यामहे जगत्॥ ३ ८॥

स्ववर्णधर्भाभिरता वेदमार्गानुसारिण:।

न शक्यास्तेऽरयो हन्तुमस्माभिस्तपसान्विता:॥ ३ ९॥

तमुपायममेयात्मन्नस्माकं दातुमर्हसि।

येन तानसुरान् हन्तुं भवेम भगवन् क्षमा।।४०॥

Upon the conclusion of their prayers, the
gods beheld the sovereign deity Hari, armed
with the shell, the discus and the mace, riding
on Garuda. Prostrating themselves before him,
they addressed him and said, "Have
compassion upon us, O lord, and protect us,
who have come to you for succour from the
Daityas. They have seized upon the three
worlds and appropriated the offerings which
are our portion, taking care not to transgress

the precepts of the Veda. Although we, as well
as they, are parts of you, of whom all beings
