372

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Hiranyakasipu, he assumed a body composed
of the figures of a lion and a man, so that
Hiranyakasipup was not aware that his
destroyer was Visnu : although therefore the
quality of purity, derived from exceeding
merit, had been attained, yet his mind was
perplexed by the predominance of the property
of passion; and the consequence of that
intermixture was, that he reaped, as the result
of his death: by the hands of Visnu, only
unlimited power and enjoyment upon earth, as
DaSanana, the sovereign of the three spheres;
he did not obtain absorption into the supreme
spirit, that is without beginning or end because
his mind was not wholly dedicated to that sole
object. So also Dasdnana being entirely
subject to the passion of love and engrossed
completely by the thoughts of Janaki, could
not comprehend that the son of Dagaratha
whom he beheld was in reality the divine
Acyuta. At the moment of his death he was
impressed with the notion that his adversary
was a mortal and therefore the fruit he derived
from being slain by Visnu was confined to his

ineffable splendour in his own essence as the
supreme being and all his passion and hatred
ceased and he was purified from every defect.
Being killed by the discus of Visnu at the
instant he thus meditated, all his sins were
consumed by his divine adversary and he was
blended with him by whose might he had been
slain. I have thus replied to your inquiries. He
by whom the divine Visnu is named or called
to recollection, even in enmity, obtains a
reward that is difficult of attainment to thc
demons and the gods : how much greater shall
be his recompense who glorifies the deity in
fervour and in faith!

देवकी-प्रमुखा बह्वय: पत्नोऽभवन्।
बलभद्र-शारण-शठ-दुर्मदादीन् पुत्रान् रोहिण्यामानक-
दुन्दुभिरुत्पादयामास। बलभद्रोऽपि रेवत्यां निशठोल्मुकौ
शारणस्यात्मजा:॥ ११॥
भद्राश्व-भद्रबाहु-दुर्द्दम-भूताद्या रोहिण्या: कुलजा:॥१२॥
नन्दोपनन्दकृतकाद्या मदिरायास्तनया:। भद्रायाश्चोपनिधि-

birth in the illustrious family of the kings of गदाद्या:। वैशाल्यां च aalfgrentnnrtaerteang sia: |

Cedi and the exercise of extensive dominion.
In this situation many circumstances brought
the names of Visnu to his notice and on all

thesc occasions the enmity that had
accumulated through successive births
influenced his mind; and in _ speaking

constantly with disrespect of Acyuta, he was
ever repeating his different appellations.
Whether walling, eating, sitting or slceping,
his animosity was never at rest and Krsna was
ever prescnt to his thoughts in his ordinary
semblance, having eyes as beautiful as the leaf
of the lotus, clad in bright yellow raiment,
decorated with a garland, with bracelets on his
arms and wrists and a diadem on his head;
having four robust arms, bearing the conch,
the disc, the mace and the lotus. Thus uttering
his names, even though in malediction and
dwelling upon his image, though in enmity, he
beheld Krsna, when inflicting his death,
radiant with resplendent weapons, bright with

भद्रदेहाख्या: FZ Yat जज्ञिरे। तांश्च सर्वानेव chat
घातितवान्।। १३॥

Vasudeva, also called Anakadundubhi, had
Rohini, Pauravi,! Bhadra, Madira, Devaki and
sevcral other wives. His sons by Rohini were
Balabhadra, Sdrana, Saru, Durmada and
others. Balabhadra espoused Revati and had
by her Nisatha and Ulmuka. The sons of
Saérana were Maérsti, Marstimat, Sigu,
Satyadhrti and others. Bhadrasva, Bhadrabahu,
Durgama, Bhita and others, were born in the
family of Rohini (of the race of Puru). The
sons of Vasudeva by Madiri were Nanda,
Upananda, Kritaka and others. Bhadra bore
him Upanidhi, Gada and others. By his wife
Vaisali he had one son named Kausika.
Devaki bore him six sons, Kirttimat, Susena,
Udayin, Bhadrasena, Rijudasa and
Bhadradeha; all of whom Kansa put to death.’
