BOOK IV, 24

of great souls, have passed away by
thousands; whose names and tribes and
families I have not enumerated to you, from
their great number and the repetition of
appellations it would involve. Two persons,
Devapi of the race of Puru and Maru of the
family of Iksvaku, through the force of
devotion continue alive throughout the whole
four ages, residing at the village of Kalapa;
they will return hither in the beginning of the
Krta age and becoming members of the family
of the Manu, give origin to the Ksatriya
dynasties.“* In this manner the earth is
possessed through every series of the three
first ages, the Krta, Tretaé and Dvapara, by the
sons of the Manu; and some remain in the Kali
age, to serve as the rudiments of renewed
generations, in the same way as Devapi and
Maru are still in existence.

We तूद्देशतो वंशस्तवोक्तो भूभुजां मया।

निखिलो गदितुं शक्यो नैव जन्मशत्तैरपि।। ४९॥

एते चान्ये च yore यैरत्र क्षितिमण्डले।

कृतं ममत्व मोहान्यैर्नित्येऽनित्यकलेवरै:।। & ofl

कथं ममेयमचला मत् पुत्रस्य कथं मही।

मद्वंशस्येति चिन्तारत्तां जग्मुन्तमिमे नृपा:॥ ५ १॥

तेभ्य: पूर्वतराश्चान्ये तेभ्यस्तेभ्यस्तथापरे।

भविष्याश्चैव यास्यन्ति तेषामन्ये च येऽप्यनु।। ५ २॥

विलोक्यात्मजयोद्योग-यात्राव्यग्रान् नराधिपान्।

पुष्पप्रहासै: शरदि हसतीव वसुन्धरा।। ५३॥

aaa! पृथ्वीगीता: श्लोकाश्चात्र fate तान्।

यानाह धर्मध्वजिने जनकायासितो मुनि:।। ५४॥

I have now given you a summary account
of the sovereigns of the earth; to recapitulate
the whole would be impossible even in a hun-
dred lives. These and other kings, who with
perishable frames have possessed this ever-
during world and who, blinded with deceptive
notions of individual occupation, have
indulged the feeling that suggests, ‘‘This earth
is Mine-it is my son’s-it belongs to my
dynasty,’ have all passed away. So, many
who reigned before them, many who

397

succeeded them and many who are yet to
come, have ceased or will cease, to be. Earth
laughs, as if smiling with autumnal flowers, to
behold her kings unable to effect the
subjugation of themselves. I will repeat to you,
Maitreya, the stanzas that were chanted by
Earth and which the Muni Asita
communicated to Janaka, whose banner was
virtue.

कथमेष नरेन्द्राणां मोहो बुद्धिमतामपि।

येन फेनसधर्माणोऽष्यतिविश्वस्तचेतस:। ५ ५॥

पूर्वमात्मजयं कृत्वा जेतुमिच्छन्ति afer:

ततो भृत्यांश्च पौरांश्च जिगीषन्ते तथा रिपून्।॥५६॥

Prthvi said— ‘‘How great is the folly of
princes, who are endowed with the faculty of
reason, to cherish the confidence of ambition,
when they themselves are but foam upon the
wave. Before they have subdued themselves,
they seek to reduce their ministers, their
servants, their subjects, under their authority;
they then endeavour to overcome their foes.

क्रमेणानेन जेष्यामो वयं पृथ्वीं ससागराम्।

इत्यासक्तधियो मृत्युं न पश्यन्त्यविदूरगम्।। ५७॥

समुद्रावरणं याति मन्मण्डलमथो वशम्।

कियदात्मजयादेतन्मुक्तिरात्मजये फलम्।। ५ ८॥

‘Thus,’ say they, ‘will we conquer the
ocean-circled earth ;’ and, intent upon their
project, behold not death, which is not far off.
But what mighty matter is the subjugation of
the sea-girt earth to one who can subdue
himself. Emancipation from existence is the
fruit of sclf-control.

उत्सृज्य पूर्वजा याता यां नादाय गत: पिता:।

at ममेति विमूढ्त्वाज्जेतुमिच्छन्ति पार्थिवा:॥ ५९॥
मत्कृते पितृपुत्राणां भ्रातॄणाञ्चापि विग्रहा:।
जायन्तेऽत्यन्तमोहेन ममताधृतचेतसाम्॥ ६ ०॥
पृथ्वी ममेयं सकला ममैषा

कुबुद्धिरासीदित TA TAG Vi
