130

THE VISNU-PURANAM

In the family of the Daitya Prablada, the amongst the birds, or in the waters, that were

Nivata Kavachas were born, whose spirits
were purified by rigid austerity'". Tamra (the
wife of Kasyapa) had six illustrious daughters,
named Suki, Syeni. Bhasi, Sugrivi, Suchi, and
Gridhrka. Suki gave birth to parrots, owls, and
crows’; Syeni to hawks; Bhasi to kites;
Grdhrkaé to vultures; Suci to water-fowl;
Sugrivi to horses, camels, and asses, Such
were the progeny of Tamra.

विनतायास्तु gat xt विख्यातौ गरुडासणौ।। १७॥

सुपर्ण: पततां श्रेष्ठो दारुण: पन्नगाशन:।

Vinaté bore to Kasyapa two celebrated
sons, Garida and Aruna : the former, also
called Suparna, was the king of the feathered
tribes, and the remorseless enemy of the
serpent race’,

सुरसायां सहस्रन्तु सर्पाणाममितौजसाम्।। १८॥
अनेकशिरसां Te खेचराणां महात्मनाम्।
The children of Surasé were a thousand

mighty many-headed serpents, traversing the
sky'*.

काद्रवेयास्तु बलिन: सहस्रममितौजस:॥ १९॥
सुपर्णवशगा ger जज्ञिरे नैकमस्तका:।
तेषां प्रधानभूतास्तु शेषवासुकितक्षका:॥ २०॥

Vig: श्वेतो महापद्म: कम्बलाश्वतरौ तथा।
एलापत्रस्तथा AM: कर्कोटक-धनञ्जयौ।। २१॥
एते चान्ये च बहवो दन्दशूका विषोल्वणा:।
The progeny of Kadru were a thousand
powerful many-headed serpents, of

immeasurable might, subject to Garuda; the
chief amongst whom were Sesa, Vasuki Taks

uka. Sankha, Sweta. Mahdpadma. Kambala,
Asvatara, Elapatra, Naga, Karkkota,
Dhananjaya, and many other fierce and

venomous serpents, .
भणं क्रोधवशं विद्धि तस्या: सर्वे च दंड्रिण:॥ २ २॥
went: पक्षिणोऽब्जाश्च दारुणा: पिशिताशना:।
क्रोधा तु जनयामास पिशाचांश्च महाबलान्।। २३॥

The family of Krodhavasa were all Sharp-
toothcd monsters!’, whether on the earth,

devourers of flesh.
गास्तु & जनयामास सुरभिर्म्महिषांस्तथा।
BT वृक्ष-लता-बल्लीस्तृणजातीश्च सर्वश:।
War तु यक्षरक्षांसि मुनिरप्सरसस्तथा॥ २४॥
अरिष्टा तु महासत्त्वान् गन्धर्वान् समजीजनत्।

Surabhi'® was the mother of cows and
buffaloes’*: Ira, of trees and creeping plants
and shrubs, and every kind of grass: KhaSa, of
the Rakshasas and Yaksas”: Muni, of the
Apsarasas”’: and Arista, of the illustrious
Gandharvas.

एते कश्यपदायादा: कीर्तिता: स्थाणु-जङ्गमा:। VAM

Rat पुत्राश्च पौन्नाश्च शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।

These were the children of Kasyapa,
whether movable ग stationary, whose
descendants multiplied infinitely through

successive generations”,

एष मन्वन्तरे सर्गो ब्रह्मन् स्वारोचिषे स्मृत:।। २६॥

वैवस्वते च महति वारुणे वितते क्रतौ।

जुह्वानस्य ब्रह्मणो वै प्रजासर्ग इहोच्यते॥ २७॥

Ud यत्र तु सप्तर्षीनुत्पन्नान् सप्त मानसान्।

पुत्रत्वे कल्पयामास wate पितामह:।। २८॥

गन्धर्वभोगिदेवानां दानवानाञ्ज सत्तम।

This creation, oh Brahman, took place in
the second or Svarociga Manvantara. In the
present or Vaivasvata Manvantara, Brahma
being engaged at the great sacrifice instituted
by Varuna, the creation of progeny, as it is
called, occurred; for he begot, as his sons. the
seven Rsis,, who were formerly mind-
engendered; and was himself the grandsire of
the Gandharvas, serpents, Danavas, «nd

gods”.

दितिर्विनष्टपुत्रा वै तोषयामास कश्यपम्।। २९॥
त्तया चाराधित: AATF कश्यपस्तपतां वर:।
AUT च्छन्दयायास सा च वव्रे तत्तोवरम्।। ३०॥
पुत्रमिन्द्रवधार्थाय समर्थममितौजसम्।

स च तस्मै at mere meats मुनिसत्तम।। ३ १॥
दत्त्वा च वरमत्युग्रं कश्यपस्तामुवाच ह।
