182

THE VISNU-PURANAM

above the lunar mansions. Sukra (Venus) is at
the same distance from Mercury. Angaraka
(Mars) is as far above Venus; and the priest of
the gods (Brhaspati, or Jupiter) as far from
Mars: whilst Saturn (Sani) is two hundred and
fifty thousand leagues beyond Jupiter. The
sphere of the seven Rsis (Ursa Major) is a
hundred thousand leagues above Saturn: and at
a similar height above the seven Rsis is
Dhruva (the pole-star), the pivot or axis of the
whole planetary circle. Such, Maitreya, is the
elevation of the three spheres (Bhi, Bhuvar,
Svar) which form the region of the
consequences of works. The region of works is
here (or in the land of Bharata).’

gage महर्लोको aa ते कल्पवासिन:।
एकयोजनकोटिस्तु यत्र ते कल्पवासिन:। १२॥
द्वे कोट्यौ तु जनो लोको wa ते ब्रह्मण: सुता:।
सनन्दनाद्या: कथिता मैत्रेयामलचेतस:॥ १३॥
चतुर्गुणोत्तरे aes जनलोकात् तप: स्मृतम्।
वैराजा यत्र ते देवा: स्थिता दाहविवजिता:।। १४॥

षड्गुणेन तपोलोकात् सत्यलोको विराजते।
अपुनर्मारका यत्र ब्रह्मलोको हि स स्मृत:।। १५॥

Above Dhruva, at the distance of ten
million leagues, lies the sphere of saints, or
Mahar-loka, the inhabitants of which dwell in
it throughout a Kalpa, or day of Brahma. At
twice that distance is situated Jana-loka, where
Sanandana and other pure-minded sons of
Brahma reside. At four times the distance,
between the two last, lies the Tapo-loka (the
sphere of penance), inhabited by the deities
called Vaibhrajas, who are unconsumable by
fire. At six times the distance (or twelve
Crores, a hundred and twenty millions of
leagues) is situated Satya-loka, the sphere of
truth, the inhabitants of which never again
know death.’

पादगम्यन्तु यत् किञ्चित् वस्त्वस्ति पृथिवीमयम्।
a भूलेकि: समाख्यातो विस्तारोऽस्य मयोदित:।। १६॥
भुवर्लोकस्तु सोऽप्युक्तो द्वितयो मुनिसत्तम।। gon

gaint aa नियुतानि चतुर्द्दश।

स्वलेकि: सोऽपि गदितो लोकसंस्थानचिन्तकै:।। १८॥
त्रैलोक्यमेतत् कृतकं मैत्रेय! परिषठ्यते।
जनस्तपस्तथा सत्यमिति चाकृतकं त्रयम्॥ १९॥
कृतकाकृतयोर्मध्ये महर्लोक इति स्मृत:।

Wt waft कल्पान्ते योऽत्यन्तं न विनश्यति।। २०॥
Ua सप्त मया लोका मैत्रेय! कथितास्तव।

पातालानि च सप्तैव ब्रह्माण्डस्यैव विस्तर:। २१॥

Wherever earthy substance exists, which
may be traversed by the feet, that constitutes
the sphere of the earth, the dimensions of
which I have already recounted to you. The
region that extends from the earth to the sun,
in which the Siddhas and other celestial beings
move, is the atmospheric sphere, which also I
have described. The intervai between the sun
and Dhruva, extending fourteen hundred
thousand leagues, is called by those who are
acquainted with thc system of the universe the
heavenly sphere. These three spheres are
termed transitory: the thrce highest, Jana,
Tapa, and Satya are styled durable:* Mahar-
loka, as situated between the two, has also a
mixed character; for although it is descrted.at
the end of the Kalpa, it is not destroyed. These
seven spheres, together with the Patalas,
forming the extent of the whole world, I have
thus, Maitreya, explained to you.

एतदण्डकटाहेन तिर्यक चोद्धूर्वमधस्तथा।
avers यथा बीजं सर्वतो वै समाव्रृतम्॥२२॥
दशोत्तरेण पयसा मैत्रेयाण्डञ्च Az FAA
सर्वोऽम्बुपरिधानोऽसौ वह्निना वेष्टितो बहि:।। २३॥
वह्निश्च वायुना वायुर्मैत्रेय! नभसा वृत:।
भूतादिना नभ: सोऽपि महता परिवेष्टित:।। २४॥
दशोत्तराण्यशेषाणि मैत्रेयैतानि सप्त वै।

महान्तञ्च समावृत्य Wa समवस्थितम्।। २५॥
अनन्तस्य न तस्यान्त: संख्यानञ्चापि विद्यते।
तदनन्तमसंख्यातप्रमाणं व्यापि वै यत:।॥ २६॥
हेतुभूतमशेषस्य प्रकृति: सा परा मुने!
अण्डानान्तु सहस्राणां सहस्राण्ययुतानि च।
