272

वार्याधप्रतोदास्तु दण्डश्च द्विजभोजनात्।
स्प्रष्टव्योऽनन्तरं वर्णै: शुध्येरंस्ते तत: HATA २१॥
aa: स्ववर्णधर्मा ये विप्रादीनामुदाहता:।

ary Hala पुमान् जीवेन्निजधर्मार्जनैस्तथा।। २ २॥

The term of impurity for a Brahmana is ten
days; for a Ksatriya, twelve; for a Vaisya, half
a month; and a whole month for a Sidra.” On
the first day after uncleanness ceases, the
nearest relation of the deceased should feed
Braéhmanas at his pleasure, but in uneven
numbers and offer to the deceased a ball of
rice upon holy grass placed near the residue of
the food that has been eaten. After the guests
have been fed. the mourner, according to his
caste, is to touch water, a weapon, a goad or a
staff, as he is purified by such contact. He may
then resume the duties prescribed for his caste
and follow the avocation ordinarily pursued by
its members.

मृताहनि च कर्तव्यमेकोद्दिष्टमत: परम्!
आह्वानादिक्रियादैव नियोगरहितं fe aa २३॥
एकोऽर्घस्तत्र दातव्यस्तथैवैकपवित्रकम्।

प्रेताय पिण्डो दातव्यो भुक्तवत्सु द्विजातिषु॥ २४॥
प्रश्नश्च तत्राभिरतिर्यजमानैर्दविजन्मनाम्।
अक्षय्यममुकस्येति वक्तव्यं विरतौ तथा।। २५॥

"The Sraddha enjoined for an individual is
to be repeated on the day of his death (in each
month for a year),!° but without the prayers
and rites performed on the first occasion and
without offerings to the Visvadevas. A single
ball of food is to be offered to the deceased, as
the purification of one person and Brahmanas
are to be fed. The Brahmanas are to be asked
by the sacrificer if they are satisfied; and upon
their assent, the prayer, 'May this ever satisfy
such a one (the deceased) is to be recited.

एकोद्दिष्टमयो धर्म इत्थमा वत्सरात् स्मृत:।
सपिण्डीकरणं तस्मिन् काले राजेन्द्र! तच्छृणु।। २६॥
एकोद्दिष्टविधानेन कार्यं तदपि पार्थिव!
(संवत्सरेऽथ षष्ठे वा मासे वा द्वादशेऽह्नि तत्)
तिलगन्धोदकैर्युक्तं तत्र पात्रचतुष्टयम्॥ २७॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM
सेचयेत् पितृपात्रेषु प्रेतपात्रं ततस्नरिषु।। २८॥
श्राद्धधर्मेरशेषैस्तु तत् पूर्वानर्चयेत् fap २९॥

"This is the Sraddha called Ekoddista,
which is to be performed monthly to the end
of a twelve month from the death of a person;
at the expiration of which the ceremony called
Sapindana is to be observed. The practices of
this rite are the same as those of the monthly
obsequies, but a lustration is to be made with
four vessels of water, perfumes and sesamum :
one of these vessels is considered as dedicated
to the deceased, the other three to the
progenitors in general; and the contents of the
former are to be transferred to the other three,
by which the deceased becomes included in
the class of ancestors, to whom worship is to
bc addressed with all the ceremonies of the
Sraddha.

Ya: पौत्र: प्रपौत्रो वा भ्राता वा भ्रातृसन्तति:।
सपिण्डसन्ततिर्वापि क्रियार्हो FT! जायते।। ३०॥
मातृपक्षसपिण्डेन सम्बद्धा ये जलेन वा।। ३ १॥
कुलद्वयेऽपि चोच्छिन्ने स्त्रीभि: कार्या fear za!
सङ्घातान्तर्गतैर्वापि कार्या: प्रेतस्य च क्रिया:।
उत्सन्नबन्धुरिक्थानां कारयेदवनीपति:।। ३ २॥

The persons who are competent to perform
the obsequies of relations connected by the
offering of the cake are the son, grandson,
great grandson, a kinsman of the deceased, the
descendants of a brother or the posterity of one
allied by funeral offerings. In absence of all
these, the ceremony may be instituted by those
related by presentations of water only or those
connected by offerings of cakes or water to
maternal ancestors. Should both families in the
male line be extinct, the last obsequies may be
performed by women or by the associates of
the deceased in religious or social institutions
or by any one who becomes possessed of the
property of a deceased kinsman.
