534

THE VISNU-PURANAM

amiqauadiars प्राप्नोति yes: कलौ।
अल्पायासेन धर्म्मज्ञास्तेन तुष्टोऽस्म्यहं कले:॥ १८॥
व्रतचर्य्यपरैर्ग्रह्यो वेद: पूर्वं द्विजातिभि:।
तत: स्वधर्म्मसम्प्राप्तैर्यष्टव्यं विधिनाध्वरै:।। १९॥
वृथा कथा वृथाभोज्यं gaan च द्विजन्मनाम्।
पतनाय तथा भाव्यं त्तैस्त्वसंयमिभि: Wart २०॥
. असम्यकक्करणे दोषस्तेषां AY कर्मसु।
भोज्यपेयादिकञ्चैषां नेच्छाप्राप्तिकरं द्विजा:।। २१॥
पारतन्त्यं समस्तेषु तेषां कार्य्यषु वै तत: ।
wafer ते निजात् लोकान् क्लेशेन महता द्विजा:।। २ २॥
द्विजशुश्रूषयैवैष पाकयज्ञाधिकारवान्।
निजान् जयति वै लोकाञ् शूद्रो धन्यतरस्तत:॥२३॥
भक्ष्याभक्ष्येषु नास्यास्ति पेयापेयेषु वै यत:।
नियमो मुनिशार्दूलास्तेनासौ साध्वितीरित:॥२४॥
स्वधर्म्मस्याविरोधेन नरैर्लब्धं धनं सदा।
प्रतिपादनीयं पात्रेषु यष्टव्यञ्ज यथाविधि।। २५॥
TTT महाक्लेश: पालने च द्विजोत्तमा:।
तथा we विनियोगाय विज्ञेयं गहनं FOTN २६॥
एभिरन्यैस्तथा क्लेशै: पुरुषा द्विजसत्तमा:।
Far जयन्ति वै लोकान्प्राजापत्यादिकान् क्रमात्।। २७
योषिच्छुश्रूषणं भर्तु: कर्म्मणा मनसा गिरा।
कुर्वतो समवाप्नोति तत्सालोक्यं यतो द्विजा:॥२८॥
नातिक्लेशेन महता तानेव पुरुषो यथा।
तृतीयं व्याहृतं तेन मया साध्विति योषित:।। २९॥
Tag a: कथितं विप्रा यन्निमित्तमिहागता:।
तत् पृच्छध्वं यथाकामं Ta वक्ष्यामि a: स्फुटम्॥३०॥
Being thus addressed by the Munis, Vyasa
smiled, and said to them, “Hear excellent
sages, why I uttered the words ‘Well done,
well done.’ The fruit of penance, of
continence, of silent prayer, and the like,
practised in the Krta age for ten years, in the
Treta for one year, in the Dvapara for a month,
is obtained in the Kali age in a day and night:
therefore did I exclaim, ‘Excellent, excellent,
is the Kali age!’ That reward which a man
obtains in the Krta by abstract meditation, in

the Treta by sacrifice, in the Dvapara by
adoration, he receives in the Kali by merely

reciting the name of KeSava. In the Kali age a
man displays the most exalted virtue by every
little exertion; therefore, pious sages, who
know what virtue is, I was pleased with the
Kali age. Formerly the Vedas were to be
acquired by the twice-born through the
diligent observances of self-denial; and it was
their duty to celebrate sacrifices conformably
to the ritual, Then idle prayers, idle feasts, and
fruitless ceremonies, were practised but to
mislead the twice-born; for although observed
by them devoutly, yet, in consequence of some
irregularity in their celebration, sin was
incurred in all their works, and what they ate,
or what they drank, did not effect the
fulfilment of their desires. In all their objects
the twice-born enjoyed no independence, and
they attained their respective spheres only with
exceeding pain. The Sidra, on the contrary,
more fortunate than they, reaches his assigned
station by rendering them service, and
performing merely the sacrifice of preparing
food, in which no rules determine what may or
may not be eaten, what may or may not be
drunk. Therefore, most excellent sages, is the
Sadra fortunate.

“Riches are accumulated by men in modes
not incompatible with their peculiar duties,
and they are then to be bestowed upon the
worthy, and expended in constant sacrifice.
There is great trouble in their acquisition; and
great grief for their loss. Thus, eminent
Brahmanas, through these and other sources of
anxiety, men attain their allotted spheres of
Prajapati and the rest only by exceeding labour
and suffering. This is not the case with
women: a woman has only to honour her
husband, in act, thought, and speech, to reach
the same region to which he is elevated; and
she thus accomplishes her object without any
great exertion. This was the purport of my
exclamation, ‘Well done!’ the third time. I
have thus related to you what you asked. Now
demand the question you came to put to me, in
any way you please, and I will make you a
distinct reply.”
