BOOK I, CHAP. 8

185

Puranas of a decidedly sectarial character add other
and higher worlds to the series. Thus the Kiirma
identifies Brahma-loka with Visnu-loka, and has a
Rudra-loka above it. The Siva places Visnu-loka
above Brahm-loka, and Rudra-loka above that. In
the Kasi Khanda we have, instead of those two,
Vaikuntha and Kailasa, as the lofty worlds of Visnu
and Siva; whilst the Brahma Vaivartta has above all
a Go-loka, a world or heaven of cows and Krsna.
These are all evidently additions to the original
system of seven worlds, in which we have probably
some relation to the seven climates of the ancients,
the seven stages or degrees of the earth of the
Arabs, and the seven heavens of the
Mohammedans, if not to the seven Amshaspends of
the Parsis. Seven, suggested originally perhaps by
the seven planets, seems to have been a favourite
number with various nations of antiquity. Amongst
the Hindus it was applied to a variety of sacred or
mythological objects, which are enumerafed in a
verse in the Hanuman Nataka. Rama is described
there as piercing seven palm-trees with an arrow,
on which other groups of seven take fright, as the
seven steeds of the sun, the seven spheres, Munis,
seas, continents, and mothers of the gods. अश्वा: सप्त
जगन्ति सप्त मुनय: सप्ताब्धय: सप्तगा:। at wa च मातरो
भयभृतसंख्यानसाम्यादिह।।

4. Kritika and Akritika; literally “made and
unmade’: the former being renewed every Kalpa,
the latter perishing only at the end of Brahmi’s life.

5. Of the Kapittha (Feronia Elephantum).

6. See before the order in which the elements are
evolved (Bk. J, ch. II).

7. The followers of Anaximander and
Democritus taught “an ‘an infinity of worlds;’ and
that not only successive in that space which this
world of ours is conceived now to occupy, in
respect of the infinity of past and future time, but
also a contemporary infinity of coexistent worlds,
at all times, throughout endless and unbounded
space.” Intellect, system, I. 303.

8. Literally ‘in wood,’ the attrition of two pieces
of which does not create, but developes, their latent
heat and flame.

9. This is Scipio’s dream the divinity is made
the cxternal limit of the universe: “Novem tibi
orbibus vel potius globis connexa sunt omnia,
quorum unus est caelestis externus qui reliquos
omnes complectitur, summus ipse deus arcens et

continens ceteros:” which Macrobius explains as to
be understood of the Supreme First Cause of all
things, only in respect of his supremacy over all,
and from his comprehending as well as creating all
things, and being regarded as the soul of the world:
“Quod et virtutes omnes, quae illam primac
omnipotentiam summitates sequuntur, aut ipse
faciat aut ipse contineat: ipsam denique Jovem
veteres vocaverunt, et apud theologos Jupiter est
mundi anima.” Jn somn. Scip. c. XVII.

10. The two passages in parentheses are the
additions of the commentator, intendcd to explain
how the deity is the material cause of the world. He
is not so of his own essence, not so immediately,
but through the interposition of Pradhana उत्पादानत्वमपि
हरे: प्रकृतिद्वारेणैव न स्वरूपेणोति भाव:। ‘As however he is the
source of Prakrti, he must be considered the
material as well as immaterial cause of being.”

ek
