562

THE VISNU-PURANAM

6. Vinispannasamadhi is the expression of the
text, which can scarcely be regarded an appellative.
The commentator terms the adept Brahmajfianin,
“He who knows Brahma.’

7. After three lives, according to the Vayu
Sanhita, as quoted in the comment.

8. There are various postures in which the Yogi
is directed to sit when he engages in meditation. In
the Bhadrasana he is directed to cross his legs
underneath him, and to lay hold of his feet on each
side with his hands.

9, waist बीज एवच। It is itself figuratively the
seeds of the fruit, which is meditation; but it is to be
accompanied with what is also technically called
Bija, or seed, inaudible repetition of certain prayers,
and meditation on the visible form of the deity,

termed likewise Alambana, and presently
mentioned.

10. Pranayama is performed by _ three
modifications of breathing: the first act is

expiration, which is performed through the right
nostril, whilst the left is closed with the fingers of
the right hand; this is called Rechaka; the thumb is
then placed upon the right nostril, and the fingers
raised from the left, through which breath is
inhaled; this is called Piraka; in the third act both
nostrils are closed, and breathing suspended; this is
Kumbhaka; and a succession of these operations is
the practice of Pranayama.

11, Alambana is the silent repetition of prayer.

12, आश्रयश्चेतसो we द्विधा tea स्वरूपता। भूप aia च
at चारमेव aii The Brahma that is without form
(Amirtta) may be Para or Apara. Supreme formless
spirit is without attributes of any kind. Secondary
formless spirit is invested with the attributes of
power, glory, truth, perfection. Spirit embodied, or
with form in his highest state, is, according to out
text, Visnu and his manifestations. Spirit in an
inferior or secondary series of bodily forms is
Brahma and all other living beings.

13. The term is Bhavand, defined to be, ‘function
to be engendered by knowledge;’ ज्ञानजन्य: संस्कार:।
the mental impression of apprehension following
upon knowledge. Here it implies in particular the
formation of a fixed idea by the Yogi of the object
of his contemplations. It is also termed Bhava-
bhavana, ‘apprehension of the being, the existence,
or substantiality, of the objects; the thing
contemplated:’ Wat वस्तु तद्विषया भावना भावभावना।

14. The term used throughout is Sakti (शक्ति),
‘power,’ ‘ability,’ ‘energy.’ By the first kind, or
Par, is understood knowledge able to appreciate
abstract truth, or the nature of universal soul; by the
second, ability to understand the nature of
embodied soul; and by the third, inability to discern
one’s own nature, and reliance on moral or
ceremonial merit. These different kinds are called
energies, because they are the energies or faculties
of the supreme spirit, or according to the Vais
navas, of Visnu, accompanying soul in all its
various conditions of existence.

15. The first, which has been intended to be
described in the foregoing passages, was the
universal, visible form of Visnu; the second is his
formless or imperceptible condition.

16. Sat (सत्), ‘what is being.’

17. Retention, or holding of the image or idea
formed in the mind by contemplation: from Dhr
(9), ‘to hold,’ literally or figuratively.

18. The explanation of Dharan4 given in the text
is rendered unnecessarily perplexed by the double
doctrine here taught, and the attempt to combine
the abstraction of Yoga theism with the sectarian
worship of Visnu.

19. The two last implements are from the
comment; the text specifies only six.

20. They are, 1. Yama &c., acts of restraint and
obligation; 2. Asana, sitting in particular postures;
3. Pranayama, modes of breathing; 4. Pratyahara,
exclusion of all external ideas; 5. Bhavana,
apprehension of internal ideas; 6. Dharana, fixation
or retention of those ideas.

21. The result of the Dhyana or Samadhi is the
absence of all idea of individuality, when the
meditator, the meditation, and the thing or object
meditated upon, are all considered to be but one.
According to the text of Patafijali: ‘Restraint of the
body, retention of the mind, and meditation, which
thence is exclusively confined to one object, is
Dhya&na: the idea of identification with the object of
such meditation, so as if devoid of individual
nature, is Samadhi; देहवन्धश्चित्र धारणा नता
ध्यानं। तदैकार्थमात्रनिर्भासं स्वरूपशून्यमिव समाधि:।।

22. The expressions of the text are somewhat
obscure, nor does the commentator make them
much more intelligible, until he cuts the matter
short by stating the meaning to be, that
‘discriminative knowledge enables the living spirit
to altain Brahma’: विज्ञानं जीवात्मानं ब्रह्म प्रापयतीत्यर्थ:।
