22.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

of progeny (Prajapati). the lord god. you shall
hear.
अतीतकल्पावसाने निशासुप्तोत्थित: प्रभु:।
सत्त्वोद्रिक्तस्तथा ब्रह्मा शून्यं लोकमवैक्षत।। ३॥
नारायण: परोऽचिन्त्य: परेषामपि स प्रभु:।
ब्रह्मस्वरूषी भगवाननादि: PAA: NI
ब्रह्मस्वरूपिणं देवं जगत: प्रभवाप्ययम्॥५॥

At the close of the past (or Padma) Kalpa.
the divine Brahma endowed with the quality of
goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and
beheld the universe void. He, the supreme
Narayana, the incomprehensible, the sovereign
of creatures, invested with the form of
Brahma, the god without beginning, the
creator of all things; of whom. with respect to
his name Narayana, the god who has the form
of Brahma, the imperishable origin of the
world, this verse is repeated.

आपो नारा इति प्रोक्ता आपो वै नरसूनव:।
अयनं तस्य ता: पूर्वं तेन नारायण: स्मृत:॥६॥
तोयान्त: स महीं ज्ञात्वा जगत्येकार्णवे प्रभु:।
अनुमानात् तदुद्धारं AAMT: प्रजापति:॥७॥
अकरोत् स तनूमन्यां कल्पादिषु यथा पुरा।
मत्स्यकूर्म्मदिकां tee वाराहं वपुरास्थित:॥ ८॥

"The waters are called Nara, because they
were the offspring of Nara (the supreme
Spirit); and as in them his first (Ayana)
progress (in the character of Brahma) took
place, he is thence named Narayana the whose
place of moving was the waters)."” He, the
lord, concluding that within the waters lay the
earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created
another form for that purpose; and as in
preceding Kalpas he had assumed the shape of
a fish or a tortoise, so in this he took the figure
of a boar.

वेदयज्ञमयं रूपमशेषजगत: स्थितौ।
स्थित: स्थिरात्मा सर्वात्मा परमात्मा प्रजापति:॥ ९॥
प्रविवेश यदा तोयमात्माधारो TTT: 11 १०॥

Having adopted a form composed of the
sacrifices of the Vedas’, for the preservation of
the whole earth, the eternal, supreme, and
universal soul, the great progenitor of created
beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other
saints who dwell in the sphere of holy men
(Janaloka); he, the supporter of spiritual and
material being, plunged into the ocean.

निरीक्ष्य तं तदा देवी पातालतलमागतम्।
तुष्टाव प्रणता भूत्वा, भक्तिनम्रा वसुन्धरा।। ११॥
The goddess Earth, beholding him thus

descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in
devout adoration, and thus glorified the god:

पृथिव्युवाच

नमस्ते सर्वभूताय तुभ्यं शङ्खगदाधर।

मामुद्धरास्मादद्य त्वं त्वत्तोऽहं पूर्व्वमुत्थिता।। १२॥

त्वत्तोऽहमुद्धृता Yor त्वन्मायाहं जनार्दन।

तथान्यानि च भूतानि गगनादीन्यशेषत:।। १३॥
नमस्ते परमात्मात्मन् पुरुषात्मन् नमोऽस्तु ते।
प्रधानव्यक्तभूताय कालभूताय ते नम:॥ १४॥

Prthvi (Earth) said— Hail to you, who are
all creatures; to you, the holder of the mace
and shell: elevate me now from this place, as
you have upraised me in days of old. From
you have I proceeded; of you do I consist; as
do the skies, and all other existing things. Hail
to you, spirit of the supreme spirit, to you, soul
of soul; to you. who are discrete and indiscreet

matter; who are one with the elements and
with time.

त्वं wat सर्वभूतानां त्वं पाता त्वं विनाशकृत्।
सर्गादिषु प्रभो ब्रह्मविष्णुरूद्रात्मरूपधृक्।। १५॥
सम्भक्षियित्वा सकलं जगत्येकार्णवीकृते।

शेषे त्वमेव Was चिन्त्यमानो मनीषिभि:।। १६॥
भवतो यत् परं तत्त्वं तन्न जानाति कश्चन।
अवतारेषु यद्रूपं तदर्च्चन्ति दिवौकस:॥ gon
त्वमाराध्य परं ब्रह्म याता मुक्तिं मुमुक्षव:।
वासुदेवमनाराध्य को मोक्षं समवाप्स्यति।। १८॥
यत् किंचिन्मनसा ग्राह्यं यदग्राह्यं चक्षुरादिभि:।
