BOOK 1, CHAP. 1

3

qeordfenaat wary वत्स भविष्यति।
देवतापारमार्थञ्च यथावद् वेत्स्यते भवान्।। ३०॥
wae a ga च कर्मण्यस्तमला मति:।
`मत्प्रसादादसन्दिग्धा तव वत्स भविष्यति।। ३ १॥
ततश्च भगवान् we वसिष्ठो मत्पितामह:।
पुलस्त्येन यदुक्तं ते सर्वमेतद् भविष्यति।। ३ २॥

Being thus admonishcd by my venerable
grandsire, I immediately desisted from the rite,
in obedience to his injunctions, and Vasistha,
the most excellent of sages, was connect with
me. Then arrived Pulastya, the son of
Brahma,'"?> who’ was received by my
grandfather with the customary marks of
respect. The illustrious brother of Pulaha said
to me: Since, in the violence of animosity. you
have listened to the words of your progenitor,
and have exercised clemency, therefore you
shall become learned in every science: since
you have forborne, even though incensed, to
destroy my posterity, I will bestow upon you
anothcr boon, and you shall become the author
of a summary of the Purinas;’* you shall know
the true nature of the deities, as it really is;
and, whether engaged in religious rites, or
abstaining from their performance,’* your
understanding, through my favour, shall be
perfect, and exempt from doubts. Then my
grandsire Vasistha added: Whatever has been
said to you by Pulastya, shall assuredly come
to pass.

इति ud वसिष्ठेन पुलस्त्येन च धीमता।

यदुक्तं तत् स्मृतिं यातं त्वत्तत्प्रश्नाखिलं WAN ३३॥

सोऽहं वदाम्यशेषं ते मैत्रेय परिपृच्छते।

पुराणसंहितां सम्यक at निबोध यथायथम्॥ ३४॥

विष्णो: सकाशात् सम्भूतं जगत् ata संस्थितम्।

स्थिति-संयमकर्त्तऽसौ जगतोऽस्य जगच्च स:॥ ३५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे प्रथमोऽध्याय:॥ gil

Now truly all that was told me formerly by
Vasistha, and by the wise Pulastya, has been
brought to my recollection by your questions,
and I will relate to you the whole, even all you
have asked. Listen to the complete

compendium of the Puranas, according to its
tenor. The world was produced from Visnu : it
exists in him: he is the cause of its continuance
and cessation: he is the world.’®

REE

NOTES

1. ओम् नमो वासुदेवाय «An address of this kind, to
one or other Hindu divinity, usually introduces
Sanskrit compositions, especially those considered
sacred. The first term of this mantra or brief prayer.
Om or Omkara, is well known as a combination of
letters invested by Hindu mysticism with peculiar
sanctity, In the Vedas it is said to comprchend all
the gods; and in the Puranas it is directed to be
prefixed to all such formulae as that of the text.
Thus in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana:
‘The syllablé Om, the mysterious name, or Brahma,
is the leader of all prayers: let it therefore, O
lovely-faced, (Siva addresses Durga.) be employed
in the beginning of all prayers:’ 31S: प्रणवो wa

नायक:। आदौ सर्वत्र युञ्जीत मन्त्राणां च शुभानने।
According to the same authority, one of the
mystical imports of the term is the collective
enunciation of Visnu expressed by A, of Sri his
bride intimated by u, and of their joint worshipper
designated by M. A whole chapter of the Vayu
Purana is devoted to this term. A text of the Vedas
is there cited: आओमित्येकाक्षं wai ‘Om. the
monosyllable Brahma;' the latter meaning either the
Supreme Being or the Vedas collectively, of which
this monosyllable is the type. It is also said to
typify the three spheres of the world, the three holy
fires, the three steps of Visnu etc.3ifeta त्रयो वेदास्त्रयो
लोकास्त्रयोऽग्नय:। विष्णुक्रमास्त्वेते॥ Frequent meditation
upon it, and repetition of it, ensure release from
worldly existence, इत्येतदक्षरं wa परमोंकारसंहितम्। यस्तु
वेदयते ee तथाध्यायति वा पुन:॥ संसारचक्रमुत्सृज्य
मुक्तवचनबन्धन:। अचलं निर्गुणं स्थानं शिवं प्राप्नोत्यसंशय:॥ See
also Manu, II. 76. Vasudeva, a name of Visnu or
Krsna, is according to its grammatical etymology, a
patronymic derivative implying son of Vasudeva.
The Vaisnava Puranas, however, devise other
explanations: see the next chapter, and again, b. VI.
c. 5,

2. In this stanza occurs a series of the
appellations of Visnu: I. Pundarikaksa, having eyes
like a lotus, or heart-pervading; or Pundarika is
explained supreme glory, and Aksa imperishable:
