BOOK I, CHAP. 9

65

circumstances; indicating their being posterior,
therefore, to the original tale. The part. however,
assigned to Durvdsas appears to be an
embellishment added to the original, for no
mention of him occurs in the Matsya Purana nor
even in the Hari Vamsa, neither does it occur in
what may be considered the oldest extant versions
of the story, those of the Ramayana and
Mahabharata : both these ascribe the occurrence to
the desire of the gods and Daityas to become
immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to
the gods, instigated by observing that the Daityas
slain by them in battle were restored to life by
Sukra with the Sanjivini, or herb of immortality,
which he bad discovered. The account in the Hari
Vamsa is brief and obscure, and is explained by the
commentator as an allegory, in which the churning
of the ocean typifics ascetic penance, and the
ambrosia is final liberation : but this is mere
mystification. The legend of the Ramayana is
translated, vol. 1. p. 410. of the Serampore edition :
and that of the Mahabharata by Wilkins, in the
notes to his translation of the Bhagavata Gita. See
also the original text. Cat ed. p. 40. It has been
presented 'to general readers in a more attractive
form by my friend H. M. Paiker. in his Draught of
Immortality, printed with other poems, Lond. 1827.
The Matsya Purana has many of the stanzas of the
Mahdabhdrata interspersed with others. There is
some variety in the order and number of articles
produced from the ocean. As I have observed
elsewhere (Hindu Theatre, 1. 59. Load. ed.), the
popular enumeration is fourteen, but the Ramayana
specifies but nine; the Mahabharata. nine; the
Bhagavata. ten; the Padma. nine; the Vayu. twelve;
the Matsya. perhaps, gives the whole number.
Those in which most agrec, are, I. the Halahala or
Kalakita poison, swallowed by Siva : 2. Varunt or
Sura, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the
gods, and rejected by the Daityas, the former were
termed Suras, and the latter Asuras: 3. the horse
Ucchaisravas. taken by Indra : 4. Kaustubha, the
jewel worn by Visnu : 5. the moon : 6.
Dhanvantari, with the Amrta in his Kamandalu. or
vase, and these two articles are in the Vayu consi-
dcred as distinct products : 7. the goddess Padma
or-Sri : 8. the Apsarasas, or nymphs of heaven : 9.
Surabhi, or the cow of plenty : 10. the Parijata tree,
or tree of heaven : 11. Airadvata, the elephant taken

by Indra. The Matsya adds, 12. the umbrella taken
by Varuna : 13. the earrings taken by Indra, and
given to Aditi : and apparently another horse, the
white horse of the sun : or the numbcr may be
completed by counting the Amrta separately from
Dhanvantari. The number is made up in the popular
lists by adding the bow and the conch of Visnu; but
there does not seem to be any good authority for
this, and the addition is a sectarial one : so is that of
thc Tulasi tree, plant sacred to Krsna, which is one
of the twelve specified by the Vayu Purina The
Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana has a peculiar
enumeration, or. Poison; Jyestha or Alaksmi, the
goddess of misfortune, the elder born to fortune :
the goddess of wine; Nidra, or sloth; the Apsarasas;
the elephant of Indra; Laksmi; the moon; and the
Tulasi plant The reference to Mohini, the female
form assumed by Visnu, is very brief in our text .
and no notice is taken of the story told in thc
Mahabharata and some of the Puranas, of the
Daitya Rahu's insinuating himself amongst the
gods, and obtaining a portion of the Amrita : being
beheaded for this by Visnu, the head became
immortal, in consequence of the Amrta having
reached the throat, and was transferred as a
constellation to the skies : and as the sun and moon
detected his presence amongst the gods, Rahu
pursues them with implacable hatred, and his
efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses;
Rahu typifying the ascending and descending
nodes. This seems to be the simplest and oldest
form of the legend. The equal immortality of the
body, under the name Ketu, and his being the cause
of meteorical phenomena, seems to have been an
after-thought. In the Padma and Bhagavata, Rahu
and Ketu are the sons of Simhika. the wife of the

Danava Vipracitti.
9, The four Vidyas. or branches of knowledge,
are said to be, Yajfiavidya, knowledge or

performance of religions rites; Mahdvidya, great
knowledge, the worship of the femalc principle, or
Tantrika worship; Guhyavidyé, knowledge of
mantras, mystical prayers, and incantation . and
Atma vidya, knowledge of soul. true wisdom

10. Or Vartta, explained to mean the Silpa Sastra,
mechanics, sculpture, and arehitecture : Ayurveda,
medicine, etc.

ll. The cause of this, however, is left
unexplained: The Padma P. inserts a legend to
