442.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

waggons.’ The spirits of these mountains, it is
said, walk the woods in whatever forms they
will or in their proper persons sport upon their
own precipices. If they should be displeased
with those who inhabit the forests, then,
transformed to lions and beasts of prey, they
will kill the offenders.

गिरियज्ञस्त्वयं rene गोयज्ञश्च प्रवर्त्यताम्।
किमस्माकं महेन्द्रेण गाव: शैलाश्च देवता:।। ३६॥
भन्त्रयज्ञपुरा विप्रा: सीतायज्ञाश्च कर्षका:।
गिरि-गोयज्ञशीलाश्च वयमद्रिवनाश्रया:।। 319 11
wang गोवर्द्धन: vet भवदभविविधार्हणै:।
अच्चर्यतां पूज्यतां मेध्यं पशुं हत्वा विधानत:॥३८॥
सर्वघोषस्य सन्दोहो गृह्यतां मा विचार्य्यताम्।
भोज्यन्तां तेन वै विप्रास्तथा ये चाभिवाञ्छका:।।३९॥

We then are bound to worship the
mountains; to offer sacrifices to cattle. What
have we to do with Indra? Cattle and
mountains are our gods. Brahmanas offer
worship with prayer; cultivators of the earth
adore their landmarks; but we who tend our
herds in the forests and mountains should
worship them and our kine. Let prayer and
offerings then be addressed to the mountains
Govardhana and kill a victim in due form. Let
the whole station collect their milk without
delay and feed with it the Brahmans and all
who may desire to partake of it.

समर्चिते कृते होमे भोजितेषु द्विजातिषु।
शरत्पुष्पकृतापीडा: परिगच्छन्तु गोगणा:।॥।४०॥
एतन्मम मतं गोपा: सम्प्रत्याद्रियते यदि।
Wa: कृत्वा भवेत् प्रीतिर्गवामद्रेस्तथा मम।।४१।।

When the oblations have been presented
and the Brahmanas have been fed, let the
Gopas circumambulate the cows, decorated
with garlands of autumnal flowers. If the
cowherds will attend to these suggestions, they
will secure the favour of the mountain, of the
cattle and also mine.

इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा नन्दाद्यास्ते व्रजौकस:।
प्रीत्युत्फुललमुखा विप्र! साधु साध्वित्यथाब्रुवन्॥ ४२॥

शोभनं ते ud वत्स! यदेतद्भवतोदितम्।

ad करिष्यामहे wd गिरियज्ञ: प्रवर्त्यताम्।॥४३॥

When Nanda and the other Gopas heard
these words of Krsna, their faces expanded
with delight and they said that he had spoken
well. ‘“You have judged rightly, child,’’
exclaimed they; ‘‘we will do exactly as you
have proposed and offer adoration to the
mountain.”’
पराशरं उवाच

तथा च कृतब’(वून्ये म्रिरिंयज्ञं व्रजीकस;।

दधि-पायस-मांसाद्यैर्ददु: शैलबलि ततत:॥४४॥

द्विजांश्च भोजयामासु: शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।

अन्यानप्यागतानित्यं कृष्णेनोक्तं यथा पुरा॥४५॥

गवि: Yer ततश्चक्रुश्चार्चितास्या: प्रदक्षिणम्।

ऋषभाश्चापि FET: सतोया जलदा FAN XE UI

Accordingly the inhabitants of Vraja
worshipped the mountain, presenting to it
curds and milk and flesh; and they fed
hundreds and thousands of Brahmanas and
many other guests, who came to the ceremony,
even as Krsna had enjoined : and when they
had made their offerings, they
circumambulated the cows and the bulls, that
bellowed as loud as roaring clouds.

गिरिमूर्द्धनि कृष्णोऽपि शैलोऽहमिति मूर्तिमान्।
बुभुजेऽन्नं बहु der गोपवर्याहितं द्विज।। ४७॥
अध्रिरुह्यर्म्ययामास द्वितोयामात्मनस्तनुघृ||४८||
अन्तर्द्धनं गते तस्मिन् गोपा crear ततो वरान्।
कृत्वा गिरिमहं गोष्ठं निजमभ्याययु: पुन:॥४९]॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे दशम: अध्याय:।।

Upon the summit of Govardhana, Krsna
presented himself, saying, ` am_ the
mountain’’ and partook of much food
presented by the Gopas; whilst in his own
form as Krsna he ascended the hill along with
cowherds and worshipped his other self’.

Having promised them many blessings, the
mountain-person of Krsna vanished; and the
