56

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Parasara said— Descending hastily from his
elephant, Mahandra endeavoured to appease
the sinless Durvdsds: but to the excuses and
prostrations of the thousand-eyed, the Muni
answered.

दुर्वासा sara

नाहं कृपालुहृदयो न च Bi भजते क्षमा।

अन्ये त्ते मुनय: शक्र दुर्व्वससमवेहि माम्।। २०॥
गौतमादिभिरन्यैस्त्वं गर्वमापादितो मुधा।
अक्षान्तिसारसर्वस्वं दुर्वाससमवेहि माम्।। २१॥
गर्वं गतोऽसि येनैवं मामप्यद्यावमन्यसे।। २२॥
ज्वलज्जटाकलापस्य भृकुटीकुटिलं मुखम्।
निरीक्ष्य कस्तिभुवने मम यो न गतो भयम्॥ २३॥
विडम्बनामियां ya: करोष्यनुनयात्मिकाम्।। २४॥

Durvési said—~ “I am not of a
compassionate heart, nor is forgiveness
congenial to my nature. Other Munis may
relent; but know me, Sakra, to be Durvasas.
You have in vain been rendered insolent by
Gautama and others; for know me, Indra, to be
Durvdsas, whose nature is a stranger to
remorse. You have been flattered by Vasistha
and other tender-hearted saints, whose loud
praises have made you so arrogant, that you
have insulted me. But who is there in the
universe that can behold my countenance, dark
with frowns, and surrounded by my blazing
hair, and not tremble ? What need of words? I
will not forgive, whatever semblance of
humility you may assume."

WIR उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा प्रययौ fast देवराजोऽपि तं पुन:।
आरुह्यैरावतं Ter प्रययावमरावतीम्।। २५॥
aa: Wyte नि:श्रीकं सशक्रं भुवनत्रयम्।
मैत्रेयासीदपध्वस्तं संक्षीणौषधिवीरुधम्॥ २६॥
न यज्ञा: सम्प्रवर्त्तन्ते न तपस्यन्ति तापसा:।
न च दानादिधर्मेषु मनश्चक्रे तदा जन:।। २७॥
नि:सत्त्वा सकला लोका लोभायु पहतेन्द्रिया:।

स्वल्पेऽपि fe बभूवुस्ते साभिलाषा द्विजोत्तम।। २ ८॥
यत: सत्त्वं ततो लक्ष्मी: सत्त्वं भूत्यनुसारि च।
नि:श्रीकाणां कुत: सत्त्वं विना तेन गुणा: HAN २९॥
बलशौर्य्यद्यभावश्च पुरुषाणां गुणैर्विना।

लङ्घनीय: समस्तस्य बलशौर्य्य विवर्जित:।। ३०॥।

भवत्यपध्वस्तमतिर्लङ्घित: प्रथित: पुमान्।

Paragara said— Having thus spoken, the
Brahman went his way; and the king of the
gods, remounting his elephant, returned to his
capital Amaravati. Thence forward, Maitreya,
the three worlds and Sakra lost their vigour,
and all vegetable products, plants, and herbs
were withered and died; sacrifices were no
longer offered; devout exercises no longer
practised; men were no more addicted to
charity or; any moral or religious obligation;
all beings became devoid of steadiness ; all
the faculties of sense were obsttucted by
cupidity; and men's desires were excited by
frivolous objects. Where there is energy, there
is prosperity; and upon prosperity energy
depends. How can those abandoned by
prosperity be possessed of energy; and without
energy, where is excellence ? Without
excellence there can be no vigour nor heroism
amongst men : he who has neither courage nor
strength, will be spurned by all: and he who is
universally created with disgrace, must suffer
abasement of his intellectual faculties.

एवमत्यन्तनि:श्रीके त्रैलोक्ये सत्त्ववज्रिते।। 3 2

देवान् प्रति बलोद्योगं चक्रुर्देतेयदानवा:।

लोभाभिभूता नि:श्रीका दैत्या: सत्त्वविवर्जिता:।। ३ २॥
श्रिया विहीनैर्नि:सत्तवैर्देवैश्चक्रुस्ततो रणम्।
विजितास्त्रिदशा दैत्यैरिन्दराद्या: शरणं ययु:।। ३३॥
पित्तामहं महाभागं हुताशनपुरोगमा:।

यथावत् कथितो देवैर्ब्रह्म। We ad: सुरान्। ३ ४॥

The three regions being thus wholly
divested of prosperity, and deprived of energy,
the Danavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of
the gods, who were incapable of steadiness,

and agitated by ambition, put torch their
strength against the gods. They engaged in war
