BOOK IV, 4

325

अनन्तरञ्च तेनापि भगवतैवाभिहितोऽस्मीत्युक्त: किं किं
मयैवाभिहितम् इति पुनरपि समाधौ तस्थौ॥ २८॥

ईं Ua, नात्यन्तमेतत्,
द्वादशाब्दं भवतो भोजनं भविष्यतीति।। २९॥

"It was yourself," replied the Raja to the
indignant sage, "who commanded this food to
be prepared." "By me!" Exclaimed Vasistha;
"how could that have been?" and again having
recourse to meditation, he detected the whole
truth. Foregoing then all displeasure towards
the king, he said, "The food to which I have
sentenced you shall not be your sustenance
forever; it shall only be so for twelve years."

मिति स्वपल्या॰ मदयन्त्या प्रसादित:। शस्याम्बुदरक्षार्थं
तच्छापाम्बु deat नाकाशे चिक्षेप, स्वपादौ
सिषेच।॥३०॥

तेन क्रोधशृतेनाम्भसा दग्धच्छायौ तत्पादौ कल्माषता-
मुपगतौ॥३१॥ `

ततश्च स कल्माषपादसंज्ञामवाप, वशिष्ठशापाच्च षष्ठे काले
राक्षसभावमुपेत्याटव्याँ पर्य्यन्ननेकशो मानुषान-
TAAL ३ २॥

The king, who had taken up water in the
palms of his hands and was prepared to curse
the Muni, now considered that Vasistha was
his spiritual guide and being reminded by
Madayanti his queen that it ill became him to
denounce an imprecation upon a holy teacher,
who was the guardian divinity of his race,
abandoned his intention. Unwilling to cast the
water upon the earth, lest it should wither up
the grain, for it was impregnated with his
malediction and equally reluctant to throw it
up into the air, lest it should blast the clouds
and dry up their contents, he threw it upon his
own feet. Scalded by the heat which the water
had derived from his angry imprecation, the
feet of the Raja became spotted black and
white and he then obtained the name of
Kalmasapada or he with the spotted (kalmasa)
feet (pada). In consequence of the curse of

Vasistha, the Raja became a cannibal every
sixth watch of the day for twelve years and in
that state wandered through the forests and
devoured multitudes of men.

एकदा तु कञ्चिन्मुनिमूतुकाले भार्यया सह सङ्गतं
ददर्श।। ३ ३॥

तयोश्च तमतिभीषणं राक्षसमवलोक्य त्रासात्
प्रधावितयोर्दम्पत्योरव्राह्मणं जग्राह।। ३ ४॥

तत: साब्राह।णीबहुशस्तयाघितबती प्रसीद

ब्राह्मणमभक्षयत्॥ 3 ५॥

ततश्चातिकोपसमन्विता ब्राह्मणी तं राजानं `यस्मादेवं
Taga त्वयायं मत्पतिर्भक्षित:)। तस्मात्
त्वमप्यन्तमवलोपभोगप्रवृत्तौ प्राप्स्यसि` इति शशापाग्निं
प्रविवेश च।। ३६॥

On one occasion he beheld a holy person
engaged in dalliance with his wife. As soon as
they saw his terrific form, they were
frightened and endeavoured to escape; but the
regal Raksasa overtook and seized the
husband. The wife of the Brahmana then also
desisted from flight and earnestly entreated the
savage to spare her lord, exclaiming, "You,
Mitrasaha, are the pride of the royal house of
Iksvaku, not a malignant fiend! It is not in
your nature, who know the characters of
women, to carry off and devour my husband."
But all was in vain and regardless of her
reiterated supplications, he ate the Brahmana,
as a tiger devours a deer. The Brahmana's
wife, furious with wrath, then addressed the
Raja and said, "Since you have barbarously
disturbed the joys of a wedded pair and killed
my husband, your death shall be the
consequence of your associating with your
queen." So saying, she entered the flames.

ततस्तस्य द्वादशाब्दपर्य्यये विमुक्तशापस्य
स्रीविषयाभिलाषिणो प्रदयन्ती स्मारयामास। aay परमसौ
ASNT तत्याज।। ३७॥
