BOOK I, CHAP. 13

87

for the evil he may have committed: and such
is the virtue of the tale of Prthu's birth , that
those who hear it repeated shall be relieved
from affliction’®.

NOTES

1. The descent of Prthu from Dhruva is similarly
traced in the Matsya Purana, but with some variety
of nomenclature : thus the wife of Dhruva is named
Dhanya; and ‘the eldest son of the Manu, Taru. The
Vayu introduces another generation, making the
eldest son of Slisti, or as there termed Pusti. father
of Udaradhi; and the latter the father of Ripu, the
father of Caksusa, the father of the Manu. The
Bhagavata has an almost entirely different set of
names, having converted the family of Dhruva into
personifications of divisions of time and of day and
night The account there given is, Dhruva mad. by
his wife Bhrami (revolving), the daughter of
Sisumara (the sphere), Kalpa and Vatsara. The
latter married Suvithi. and had six sons. Pushparna,
Tigmaketu, Isha, Urjja, Vasu and Jaya. The first
married Prabha and Doahi. and had by the former,
Pratah (dawn), Madhyadina (noon), and Saya
(evening); and by the latter, Pradosha, Nisitha, and
Vyusta. or the beginning, middle, and end of night.
The fast has, by Puskarini. Caksusa. mar, ried to
Akuti. and the father of Chaksusha Manu. He has
twelve sons Puru, Kritsna, Rita, Dyumna, Satyavat,
Dhrita, Vrata. Agnistoma Atiratra, Pradyumna.
Sivi, and Ulmuka. The last is the farther of six sons,
named as in our text, except the last. who is called
Gaya. The eldest, Anga, is the father of Vena. the
father of Prthu. These additions are evidently the
creatures of the author's imagination. The Brahma
Purana and Hari Vamsa have the same genealogy
as the Visnu, reading, as do the Matsya and Vayu,
Pushkarini or Varani. the daughter of Virana,
instead of Varuna. They, as well as copies of the
text, present several other varieties of
nomenclature. The Padma Purana (Bhimi Khanda)
says Anga was of the family of Atri, in allusion
perhaps to the circumstance mentioned in the
Brahma Purana of Unioapida's adoption by that
Rsi.

2, With the Dirgbasaira, ‘long sacrifice; a
ceremony lasting a thousand years.

3. That is, the land will be fertile in proportion as
the gods are propitiated, and the king will benefit
accordingly, as a sixth part of the merit and of the
produce will be his. So the commentator explains
the word ‘portion:' अंश: षष्ठो भाग:।

4. The Matsya says there were born outcast or
barbarous races, Mlecchas (म्लेच्छजातय:) as black as
collyrium. The Bhagavata describes an individual
of dwarfish stature, with short arms and legs, of a
complexion as black as a crow, with projecting
chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair;
whose descendants were mountaineers and
foresters : गिरिकाननगोचरा: | The Padma (Bhu. Kb.) has
a Similar description, adding to the dwarfish stature
and black complexion, a wide mouth, large ears,
and a protuberant belly. It also particularizes his
posterity as Nishadas, Kirdtas, Bhillas. Bahanakas,
Bhramaras, Pulindas, and other barbarians, or
Mlecchas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the
uncouth apperance of the Goands, Koles, Bhils, and
other uocivilized tribes, scattered along the forests
and mountains of central India, from Behar to
Kandesh, and who are not improbably the
predecessors of the present occupants of the
cultivated portions of the country. They are always
very black, ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have
countenances of a very African character.

5. A CakravarttI, or, according to the text. one in
whom the Cakra, the discus of Visnu, abides
(varttate); such a figure being delineated by the
lines of the hand. The grammatical etymology is,
‘he who abides in, or rules over, an extensive
territory called a Cakra.'

6. From raga (<™),'passion' or 'affection;' but the
more obvious etymology is raj (राज ), to shine’ or
“be splendid.

7. The birth of Prthu is to be considered as the
sacrifice, of which Brahma, the creator, was the
performer; but in other places, as in the Padma, it is
considered that an actual sacrificial rite was
celebrated, at which the first encomiasts were
produced, The Bhigavata does not account for their
appearance.

8. ‘Having willed or determined the Manu
Swayambhuva to be the calf, संकल्पयित्वा amd तु Ad
स्वायुम्भुवं। So the Padma Purana ; aed तस्या: प्रकल्पितं।
मनुं स्वायम्भुवं Jed परिचिन्त्यं पुन: पुन:। The Bhagavata has
‘ard कृत्वा मनुं। Having made the Manu the calf.’ By
