78

कथयामि ad: किं ते सर्वं atte हृदि स्थितम्।
सर्वात्मन् सर्वभूतेश सर्वसत्वसमुद्भव।। ७४॥
सर्वभूतो भवान् वेत्ति सर्वभूतमनोरथम्।

यो मे मनोरथो नाथ सफल: स त्वया कृत:।
तपश्च तप्तं सफलं यद दृष्टोऽसि HATTA ७५॥

What can I say to you? you know all that
is in the heart, oh soul of all, sovereign lord of
all creatures, origin of all things. You, who are
all beings, knowcst the desires of all creatures.
The desire that I cherished has been gratified,
lord, by you: my devotions have been crowned
with success, in that I have seen you.”

श्रीभगवानुवाच
तपसस्तु फलं प्राप्तं Ae दृष्टोऽहं त्वया Tal
मद्दर्शनं हि विफलं राजपुत्र: न जायते॥७६॥
वरं वरय तस्मात् त्वं यथाभिमत मात्मन:।
aa सम्पद्यते पुंसां मयि दृष्टिपथं गते।। ७७॥

Visnu said to Dhruva: “The object of your
devotions has in truth been attained, in that
you have seen me; for the sight of me, young
prince, is never unproductive. Ask therefore of
me What boon you desire; for men in whose
sight I appear obtain all their wishes.”
qa उवाच

भगवन् सर्वभूतेश सर्वस्यास्ते भवान् हृदि।
किमज्ञातं तव स्वामिन् मनसा यन्मयेप्सितम्॥७८॥
तथापि तुभ्यं देवेश कथयिष्यामि यन्मया।

प्रार्थ्यते ढुर्विनीतेन हृदयेनातिदुर्हभम्॥ ७९॥

किं वा सर्व्वजगत्स्रष्ट: प्रसन्ने त्वयि दुर्हभम्।
त्वत्रसादफलं YS त्रैलोक्यं मघवानपि।। ८ oI
tae राजासनं योग्यमजातस्य ममोदरात्।

इति गर्वादवोचन्मां सपत्नी मातुरुच्चकै:॥ ८ १॥
आधारभूत जगत: सर्ववैषामुत्तमोत्तोमम्।

प्रार्थयामि प्रभो स्थानं त्वत्प्रसादादतोऽव्ययम्।। ८ २॥

To this, Dhruva answered : “Lord god of
all creatures, who abidest in the hearts of 2!1,
how should the wish that | chrish be unknown
to you ? I well confess unto you the hope that
my presumptuous heart has entertained; a hope

THE VISNU-PURANAM

that it would be difficult to gratify, but that
nothing is difficult when you, creator of the
world, are pleased. Through your favour, Indra
reigns over the three worlds. The sister-queen
of my mother has said to me, loudly and
arrogantly, ‘The royal throne is not for one
who is not born of me;’ and I now solicit of the
support of the universe an exalted station,
superior to all others, and one that shall endure
for ever.”’

श्रीभगवानुवाच
यत् त्वया प्रार्थितं स्थानमेत्तत् प्राप्स्यति वै भवान्।
त्वयाहं तोषित: पूर्वमन्यजन्मनि बालक:।। ८ ३॥
त्वमासीर्ब्रह्मण: पूर्वं मय्येकाग्रमति: सदा।
मातापित्रोश्च शुश्रूषुर्निजधर्मानुपालक:।॥ ८४॥
कालेन गच्छता मित्रं राजपुत्रस्तवाभवत्।
यौवनेऽखिलभोगाढ्यो दर्शनीयोज्ज्वलाकृति:।॥ ८ &
तत्संगात् तस्य तामृद्धिमवलोक्यातिदुर्लभाम्।
भवेयं राजपुत्रोऽहमिति वाञ्छा त्वया कृता॥ ८६॥
ततो यथाभिलषिता प्राप्ता ते राजपुत्रता।
उत्तानपादस्य गृहे जातोऽसि ga दुर्लभे।। ८७॥
अन्येषां Ae at स्थानं Hel स्वायम्भुवस्य यत्।
तस्यैतदवरं बाल येनाहं परितोषित:।। ८ cit
मामाराध्य नरो मुक्तिमवाणोत्यविलम्बिताम्।
मयर्पितमना बाल किमु स्वर्गादिकं पदम्। ८ ९॥

Visnu said to him: “The station that you
aske you shall obtain; for I was satisfied with
you of old in a prior existence, You wast
formcrly a Brahman, whose thoughts were
ever devoted to me, ever dutiful to your
parents, and observant of your duties. In
course of time a prince became your friend,
who was in the period of youth, indulged in all
sensual pleasures, and was of handsome
appearance and elegant form. Beholding, in
consequence of associating with him, his
affluence, you formed the desire that you
might be subsequendy born as the son of a
king; and, according to your wish, you
obtained a princely birth in the illustrious
mansion of Uttanapdda. But that which would
have been thought a great boon by others, birth
in the race of Svayambhuva, you have not so
