BOOK III, CHAP. 11

265

कृतपादादिशोचस्तु भुक्त्वा सायं ततो गृही।
गच्छेच्छय्यामस्फुटितामपि दारुमयीं JU १० ८४॥
नाविशालां न वै भग्नां नासमां मलिनां न च।

न च जन्तुमयीं शय्यामधितिष्ठेदनास्तृताम्॥ १० ९॥
प्राच्या दिशि शिर: शस्तं याम्यायामथं वा नृप!
Wea स्वपत: Gar विपरीतान्तु रोगदम्॥ ११०॥
ऋतावुपगम: शस्त: स्वपत्न्यामवनीपते।
पुन्नामर्षॆ शुभे काले ज्येष्ठायुग्मासु रात्रिषु॥ १११॥
नास्न्रातान्तु fart गच्छेन्नातुरां न रजस्वलाम्।
नानिष्टां न प्रकुपितां नाप्रशस्तां न च गभिणीम्॥ ११२॥
क्षुह्षामां नातिभुक्तां वा स्वयञ्चैभिर्गुणैर्युत:।। ११३॥
स्नात: स्रग् गन्धधृक् प्रीतो न ध्यात: क्षुधितोऽपि वा।
सकाम: सानुरागश्च व्यवायं पुरुषो TAT ११४॥
चतुर्दश्यष्टमी da अमावस्याथ पूर्णिमा।
पर्वाण्येतानि wera! रविसंक्रान्तिरेव च।। ११५॥
त्तैलस्त्रीमांससभ्भोगी पर्वेष्वेतेषु वै पुमान्।
विष्मूत्रभोजनं नाम प्रयाति नरकं TAN ११६॥
अशेषपर्वस्वेतेषु तस्मात् संयमिभिर्बुधै:।

भाव्यं सच्छास्त्रदेवेज्याध्यानजप्यपरैर्नरे:॥ ११७॥
नान्ययोनावयोनौ वा नोपयुक्तौषधस्तथा।
देवद्दिजगुरूणाञ्च व्यवायी नाश्रमे भवेत्।। ११८॥
चैत्यचत्वरतीर्थेषु नैव गोष्ठे चतुष्पथे।

नव श्मशानोपवने सलिलेषु महीपते॥ ११९॥
प्रोक्तपर्वस्वशेषेषु नैव भूपाल! सन्ध्ययो:।

गच्छेद् व्यवायं मतिमान् न मूत्रोच्चारपीडित:॥ १२ oll
पर्वस्वभिगमोऽधन्यो fear पापप्रदो नृप!

भुवि रोगावहो नॄणामप्रशस्तो जलाशये।। १२ १॥
परदारान् न गच्छेद्च मनसापि कदाचन।

faq वाचास्थिब्धोऽपि नास्ति तेषुव्यवायिनाम्।। १२ २॥
Yat नरकमभ्येति हीयतेऽत्रापि चायुष:।

परदारगति: पुंसामुभयत्रापि भीतिदा।। १२३॥

इति मत्वा स्वदारेषु ऋतुमत्सु बुधो व्रजेत्।
यथोक्तदोषहीनेषु सकामेष्वनृतावपि॥ १२४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे एकादशोऽध्याय:।। ११॥

"After eating his evening meal and having
washed his feet, the householder is to go to
rest. His bed is to be entire and made of wood:
it is not to be scanty, nor cracked, nor uneven,
nor dirty, nor infested by insects, nor without a
bedding: and he is to sleep with his head either
to the east or to the south; any other position is
unhealthy. In due season a man should
approach his wife, when a fortunate asterism
prevails, in an auspicious moment and on even
nights, if she is not unbathed, sick, unwell,
averse, angry, pregnant, hungry or over-fed.
He should be also free from similar
imperfections, should be neatly attired and
adored and animated by tenderness and
affection. There are certain days on which
unguents, flesh and women are unlawful, as
the eighth and fourteenth lunar days, new
moon and full moon,” and the entrance of the
sun into a new sign. On these occasions the
wise will restrain their appetites and occupy
themselves in the worship of the gods, as
enjoined by holy writ, in meditation and in
prayer; and he who behaves differently will
fall into a hell where ordure will be his food.
Let not a man stimulate his desires by
medicines, nor gratify them with unnatural
objects or in public or holy places. Let him not
think incontinently of another's wife, much
less address her to that end; for such a man
will be born in future life as a creeping insect.
He who commits adultery is punished both
here and hereafter; for his days in this world
are cut short and when dead he falls into hell.
Thus considering, let a man approach his own
wife in the proper season or even at other
times."

KKK

NOTES

1. Jones renders Acara (ara), 'the immemorial
customs of good men’ (Manu, II. 6); following the
explanation of Kullika Bhatta, which is much the
same as that of our text ; कम्बलवल्ककाद्याचरअरूप: साधूनां
धाम्मिकानां। ‘Acdra means the use of blankets or bark,
for dress. Sadhus are pious or just men.' Acaras are,
in fact, all ceremonial and purificatory observances
