BOOK V, CHAP. 19

439

स निष्कासितमस्तिष्को मुखाच्छोणितमुद्वमन्।

निपपात महीपृष्ठे दैत्यवर्यो ममार च।॥ ३६॥

vera fred दृष्टवा बलेनाद्भुतकर्म्मणा।

प्रहरष्टास्तुष्टुवुर्गोपा: साधु साध्विति चाब्रुवन्॥ ३७॥

संस्तूयमानो गोपैस्तु रामो दैत्ये निपातिते।

प्रलम्बे सह कृष्णेन पुनर्गोकुलमाययौ।। ३ ८॥

इति श्रीकृष्णपुराणे पञ्चमांशे नवम: अध्याय:।।

Thus reminded by the magnanimous Krsna,
the powerful Baladeva laughed and squeezed
Pralamba with his knees, striking him at the
same time on the head and face with his fists,
so as to beat out both his eyes. The demon,
vomiting blood from his mouth and having his
brain forced through the skull, fell upon the
ground and expired. The Gopas, beholding
Pralamba slain, were astonished and rejoiced
and cried out, ‘‘Well done,’’ and praised .
Balarama: and thus commended by his play-
fellows and accompanied by Krsna, Bala, after
the death of the daitya Pralamba, returned to
Gokula.’

NOTES

1. Jumping with both feet at once, as deer bound,
two boys together, the one that holds out longest or
comes to a given point first, is the victor and the
vanquished is then bound to carry him to the goal,
if not already attained and back again to the starting
post, on his shoulders. The Bhagavata does not
specify the game, but mentions that the vanquished
carry the victors on their backs.

2. This passage is read and explained differently
in different copies. In some it is, 34 यथा
शुसङ्काञ्जलत्वमुपैति पुनस्तथैव।। And this is explained,
सामुद्रमम्बु वाडावाख्येन वह्निना aa भक्षितं घनीभूय हिमस्वरूपं
कस्तकसंज्ञेनवायुना वाडवाग्निगतेन सूर्य्य नाडीमयेन परिगृह्य गृहीत्वा
स्वस्थमाकशस्थं कृतं सन् हिमाचले भवतीति शेष:।। ‘The water
of the ocean, devoured by the fire called Vadava,
becoming condensed or in the form of dew or
snow, is seized by the wind called Kastaka, from
which the Vadava fire has departed, consisting of a
pipe of the solar rays and being placed in the air,
lies or is on the Himacala’ etc. This is rather an
awkward and confused representation of the notion
and the other reading is somewhat preferable : it

consists simply in substituting कास्त for स्वस्थं that is,
according to the commentary, अम्बु वाडवाग्निना जग्धं
कास्तं केन वायुना वाडवाग्निगतेनार्करस्मिनाडीमयेन अस्तं हिमाचले
fad fered परिगृह्य स्थितं सत्। ‘The water devoured by
the fire is thrown by the wind Ka, made of a solar
ray etc.; on the Himacala, where it assumes the
form of snow;’ and so on. However disfigured by
inaccurate views of some of the instruments in
operation, the physiology is in the main very
correct and indicates accurate observation of
natural phenomena. The waters of the ocean,
converted into vapour by solar heat, are raised by
the same influcnce into the air and thence borne by
the winds to the summits of lofty mountain ranges,
where they are arrested by a diminished
temperature, descend in the form of snow and again
supply the streams that perpetually restore to the
sea the treasures of which it is as perpetually
plundered.

3. According to the Hari Varga the gods
themselves praised this proof of Rama’s strength
(bala) and hence he derived the name of Balarama.

१०४९ १९
