10

THE VISNU-PURANAM

नारिकेलफलस्यान्तर्बजं बाह्यदलैरिव।। & 61

Its womb, vast as the mountain Mcru, was
composed of the mountains; and the mighty
oceans were the waters that filled its cavity. In
that egg, O Brahman, were the continents and
seas and mountains, the planets and divisions
of the universe, the gods, the demons, and
mankind. And this egg was externally invested
by seven natural envelopes, or by water, air,
fire, ether, and Ahankara the origin of the
elements, each tenfold the extent of that which
it invested; next came the. principle of intelli-
gence; and finally, the whole was surrounded
by the indiscrcte Principle: resembling thus
the cocoa-nut, filled ulteriorly with pulp, and
exteriorly covered by husk and rind.

जुषन् रजोगुणं तत्र wad विश्वेश्वरो हरि:।
ब्रह्मा भूत्वास्य जगतो विसृष्टौ सम्प्रवर्त्तते॥ ५९॥
सृष्टञ्च पात्यनुयुगं यावत् कल्पविकल्पना।
सत्त्वभुग् भगवान् विष्णुरप्रमेयपराक्रम:।।६०॥
TAA च कल्पान्ते रूद्ररूपी जनार्दन:।

भैत्रेयाखिलभूतानि भक्षयत्यतिभीषण:।। ६ १॥
स भक्षयित्वा भूतानि जगत्येकार्णवीकृते।

नागपर्य्यङ्कशयने शेते च परमेश्वर:।। ६ २॥

प्रबुद्धश्च पुन: ule करोति gare ६३॥

Affecting then the quality of activity, Hari,
the lord of all, himself becoming Brahma,
engagcd in the creation of the universe. Visnu
with the quality of goodness, and of
immeasurable power, preservcs created things
through successive ages, until the close of the
period termed a Kalpa; when the same mighty
deity, Janardhana.*’ invested with the quality
of darkness, assumes the awful from of Rudra,
and swallows up the universe. Having thus
devoured all things, and converted the world
into one vast ocean, the Supreme reposes upon
his mighty serpent couch amidst the deep: he
awakes after a season, and again, as Brahma,
becomes the author of creation.

सृष्टिस्थित्यन्तकरणाद् ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवात्मिकाम्।
स संज्ञां याति भगवानेक एव जनार्दन:।॥ ६४॥

wet yale चात्मानं विष्णु: पाल्यञ्ज wit a
उपसंह्रियते art deat च स्वयं प्रभु:।।६५॥
पूथिव्यापस्तथा तेजो वायुराकाशमेव च।
सर्वेन्दियान्त:करणं पुरुषाख्यं fe यज्रगत्।। ६६॥
स एव सर्वभूतेशो विश्वरूपो यतोऽव्यय:।
सर्गादिकं ततोऽस्यैव भूतस्थमुपकारकम्। ६७॥
स एव सृज्य: स च Went

स एव पात्यत्ति च पाल्यते च।

विष्णुर्वरिष्ठो वरदो वरेण्य:॥६ ८॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे द्वितीयोऽध्याय:।

Thus the one only god, Janarddana, takes
the designation of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva,
accordingly as he creates, preserves, or
destroys.” Visnu as creator, creates himself;
as preserver, preserves himself; as dcstroyer,
destroys himself at the end of all things. This
world of earth, air, fire. water, ether, the
senses, and the mind; all that is termed spirit,
that also is the lord of all elements, the univer-
sal from, and impreishable: hence he is the
cause of creation, preservation, and
destruction; and the subject of the vicissitudes
inherent in elementary nature.’ He is the
object and author of creation: he preserves,’
destroys, and is preserved. He, Visnu, as
Brahma, and as all other beings, is infinite
form: he is the supreme, the giver of all good,
the fountain of all happiness.”

aa

NOTES

1. The three hypostases of Visnu. Hiranyagarbba
is a name of Brahma; he who was born from the
golden egg. Hari is Visnu, and Sankara Siva. The
Visnu who is the subject of our text is the supreme
being in all these three divinities or hypostases, in
his different characters of creator, preserver and
destroyer. Thus in the Markandeya: ‘Accordingly.
as the primal all-pervading spirit is distinguished by
attributes in creation and the rest. so he obtains the
denomination of Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. In the
capacity of Brahma he creates the worlds; in that of
Rudra be destroys them; in that of Vignu he is
