54

THE VISNU-PURANAM

4. This simple account of Sati’s share in the
transaction is considerably modified in other
accounts. In the Kirma, the quarrel begins with
Daksa the patriarch's being, as he thinks, treated by
his son-in-law with less respect than is his due.
Upon his daughter Sati subsequently visiting him,
he abuses her husband, and turns her out of his
house.

She in spite destroys herself: ददाहात्मानमात्मना। Siva.
hearing of this. comes to Daksa, and curses him to
be born as a Ksatriya, the son of the Pracetasas, and
to beget a son on his own daughter: स्वस्यां सुतायां
मूढात्मन् पत्रमुत्पादयिष्यस It is in this subsequent birth that
the sacrifice occurs. The Lifga and Matsya allude
to the dispute between Daksa and Sati. and to the
latter's puting an end to herself by Yoga:

देहं Syt:The Padma.
Bhagavata, and Skanda in the Kasi Khanda, relate
the dispute between father and daughter in a like
manner, and in more detail. The first refers the
death of Sati. however, to a prior period; and that
and the Bhagavata both ascribe it to Yoga: wil a:
प्रजज्वाल समाधिजाग्निना। The Kasi Khanda, with an
improvement indicative of a later age, makes Satfi
throw herself into the fire prepared for the
solemnity.

5. The description of Virabhadra and_ his
followers is given in other Puranas in the same
strain, but with less detail.

6. Their exploits, aod those of Virabhadra, are
more particularly specified elsewhere, especially in
the Linga. Kiirma, and Bhagavta Puranas. Indra is
knocked down and trampled on; Yama has his staff
broken; Sarasvati and the Matrs have their noses
cut off; Mitra or Bhaga has his eyes pulled out;
Pusha has his teeth knocked down his throat;
Candra is pummelled : Vahni's hands are cut off;
Bhrgu loses his beard; the Brahmanas are pelted
with stones ; the Prajapatis are beaten . and the
gods and demigods are run through with swords or
stuck with arrows.

7. This is also mentioned in the Linga and in the
Hari Varnsa: and the latter thus accounts for the
origin of the constellation Migosiras,; Yajfia, with
the head of a dear. being elevated to the planetary
region. by Brahma.

8. As he prays to Siva presently, it could not well
be meant here that Daksa was decapitated, although
that is the story in other places. The Linga and

Bhagavata both state that Virabhadra cut off Daks
a's head, and threw it into the fire. After the fray
therefore when Siva restored the dead to life, and
the mutilated to their limbs. Daksa's head was not
forthcoming : it was therefore replaced by the head
of a goat, or, according to the Kasi Khanda, that of
a ram. No notice is taken in our text of the conflict
elsewhere described between Virabhadra and Vis
nu. In Ihe Linga, the latter is beheaded, and his
head is blown by the wind into the fire. The Kirma.
though a Saiva Purana, is less irreverent towards
Visnu, and after describing a contest in which both
parties occasionally prevail, makes Brabma
interpose, and separate the combatants. The Kasi
Khanda of the Skanda Purana describes Visnu as
defeated, and at the mercy of Virabhadra. who is
prohibited by a voice from heaven from destroying
his antagonist ; whilst in the Hari Varnga, Visnu
compels Siva to fly, after taking him by the throat
and nearly strangling him. The blackness of Siva's
neck arose from this throttling, and not, as
elsewhere described, from his drinking the poison
produced at the churning of the ocean.

४६९४ ४९ ७
