३14

THE VISNU-PURANAM

ढु:खं यदेवैकशरीरजन्म-
vraag तदिदं प्रसूतम्।

परिग्रहेण क्षितिपात्मजानां
सुतैरनेकैर्बहुलीकृतं Aye

The pain attendant upon the birth of my
single body, is now augmented by the cares
attached to fifty others and is further
multiplied by the numerous children whom
the princesses have borne to me.

सुतात्मजैस्तत्तनयैश्च भूयो
wey तेषां स्वपरिग्रहेण।
परिग्रहो वै ममतानिधानम्।॥५०॥

The sources of affliction will be repeatedly
renewed by their children and by their
espousals and by their progeny and will be
infinitely increased : a married life is a mine
of individual anxiety.

चीर्णं तपो यत्तु जलाश्रयेण

arate तपसोऽन्तराय:।
मत्स्यस्य सङ्घादभवच्च यो मे

सुतादिरागो मुषितोऽस्मि तेन।। ५१

My devotions, first disturbed by the fish of
the pool, have since been obstructed by
temporal indulgence and I have been beguiled
by that desire for progeny which was
communicated to me by association with
Sammada. Separation from the world is the
only path of the sage to final liberation : from
commerce with mankind innumerable errors
proceed.

age मुक्तिपदं यतीनां

सङ्गादशेषा: प्रभवन्ति दोषा:।
आरूढयोगोऽपि निपात्यतेऽध:
सङ्गेन anit किमुताल्पसिद्धि:॥ ५ २॥

The ascetic who has accomplished a course
of self-denials falls from perfection by
contracting worldly attachments : how much
more likely should one so fall whose
observances are incomplete?

अहं चरिष्यामि तथात्मनोऽर्थे
परिग्रहग्राहगृहीतबुद्धि:।
यथा fe qa: परिहीणदोषो
जनस्य दु:खैर्भविता न दु:खी।। ५३॥
सर्वस्य धातारमचिन्त्यरूपम-
णोरणीयांसमतिप्रमाणम्।
सितासितञ्चेश्चमीश्वराणा-
माराधयिष्ये तपसैव विष्णुम्॥५४॥

My intellect has been a pray to the desire of
married happiness; but I will now so exert
myself for the salvation of my soul, that,
exempt from human imperfections, I may be
exonerated from human sufferings. To that
end I will propitiate, by arduous penance, Vis
nu, the creator of the universe, whose form is
inscrutable, who is smaller than the smallest,
large than the largest, the source of darkness
and of light, the sovercign god of gods.

तस्मिन्नशेषौजसि सर्वरूपि-

एयव्यक्तविस्पष्टतनावनन्ते।

भमाचलं चित्तमपेतदोषं

सदास्तु विष्णावभवाय भूय:॥ ५ ५॥ .

On his everlasting body, which both
discrete and indiscreet substance, illimitably
mighty and identical with the universe may
my mind, wholly free from sin, be ever
steadily intent, so that I may be born no more.

समस्तभूतादमलादनन्तात्त्
सर्वेश्चरादन्यदनादिमध्यात्।

यस्मान्न किश्चित् तमहं गुरुणां
परं गुरुं संश्रयमेमि विष्णुम्॥५६॥

usta विष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे द्वितीय: अध्याय:॥

To him I fly for refuge; to that Visnu, who
is the teacher of teachers, who is one will all
beings, the pure eternal lord of all, without
beginning, middle or end and besides whom is
nothing."

NOTES

1. According to the Vayu, the brothers of
Raivata founded a celebrated race called Saryata,
