74

The celestials called Yamas, being
excessively alarmed, then took counsel with
Indra how they should interrupt the devout
exercises of Dhruva; and the divine beings
termed Kusmandas. in company with their
king, commenced anxious efforts to distract
his meditations. One, assuming the semblance
of his mother Suniti, stood weeping before
him, and calling in tender accents, “My son,
my son, desist from destroying they strength
by this fearful penance. I have gained you, my
son, after much anxioux hope: you can not
have the cruelty to quit me, helpless, alone,
and unprotected, on account of the unkindness
of my rival. You are my only refuge; I have no
hope but you.

wa च त्वं पञ्चवर्षीय: क्व चैतद् दारुणं तप:।
franiat wa: कष्टान्निर्बध्धात् फलवज्जितात्।। १७॥
काल: क्रीडनकानां ते तदन्तेऽध्ययनस्य TI

AA; समस्तभोगानां तदन्ते चेष्यते AT १८॥
कालक्रीडनकानां यस्तव बालस्य पुत्रक।
तस्मिंस्त्वमित्थं तपसि किं नाशयात्मनो रत:।। १९॥
मत्प्रीति: परमो eat वयोऽवस्थाक्रियाक्रमम्।
अनुवर्त्तस्व सा मोहं निवर्त्तस्मादधर्मत:।। २०॥
यरित्यजति वत्साद्य यद्येतन्न भवांस्तप:।
त्यक्ष्याम्यहमपि प्राणांस्ततो वै पश्यतस्तव।। २१

What have you, a child but five years old,
to do with rigorous penance? Desist from
such fearful practices, that yield no beneficial
fruit. First comes the season of youthful
pastime; and when that is over, it is the time
for study: then succeeds the period of worldly
enjoyment: and lastly, that of austere devotion.
This is your season of pastime, my child. Have
you engaged in these practices to put an end to
your existence? Your chief duty is love for
me: duties are according to time of life. Lose
not thyself in bewildering error: desist from
such unrighteous actions. If not, if you will not
desist from these austerities, I will terminate
my life before you.”

पराशर उवाच

THE VISNU-PURANAM

समाहितमना विष्णौ पश्यन्नपि न दृष्टवान्।। २२॥
वत्स वत्स सुघोराणि रक्षांस्येतानि भीषणे।
वनैऽभ्घुद्यतशस्राणिसमायप्त्यपगम्यताम्॥रइ॥

फ्युचुर्दंप्तिशस्त्रग्भिम्रत्मयन्तौक्कि॥शा॥
शिवाश्च शतशो Ae: सज्वालाकवलैर्मुखै:।
त्रासाय तस्य बालस्य योगयुक्तस्य सर्वश:॥ २६॥

But Dhruva, being wholly intent on seeing
Visnu, beheld not his mother weeping in his
presence, and calling upon him; and the
illusion, crying out, “Fly, fly, my child, the
hideous spirits of ill are crowding into this
dreadful forest with uplifted weapons,”
quickly disappeared. Then advanced frightful
Raksasas, wielding terrible arms, and with
countenances emitting fiery flame; and
nocturnal fiends thronged around the prince,
uttering fearful noises, and whirling and
tossing their threatening weapons. Hundreds
of jackals, from whose mouths gushed flame1
as they devoured their prey, were bowling
alcud, to appal the boy, wholly engrossed by
meditation.

हन्यतां हन्यतामेष छिद्यतां छिद्यतामयम्।

भक्ष्यतां भक्ष्यताञ्चायमित्यूचुस्ते निशाचरा:॥ २७॥

ततो नानाविधान् नादान् सिंहोष्ट्रमकरानना:।

त्रासाय राजपुत्रस्य नेढुस्ते रजनीचरा:॥ २८॥

रक्षांसि तानि ते नादा: शिवास्तान्यायुधानि च।

गोविन्दासक्तचितस्य ययुर्नेन्दियगोचरम्॥ २९॥

एकाग्रचेता: सततं विष्णुमेवात्मसंश्रयम्।

दृष्टवान् पृथिवीनाथपुत्रो नान्यत् कथञ्चन।। ३ oI

The goblins called out, "Kill him, kill him;
cut him to pieces; eat him, eat him;” and
monsters, with the faces of lions and camels
and crocodiles, roared and yelled with horrible
cries, to territy the prince. But all these
uncouth spectres, appalling cries, and
threatening weapons, made no impression
upon his 'senses, whose mind was completely
