458

THE VISNU-PURANAM

accomplish some object cherished in his heart.
That Ananta, who holds the earth upon his
crest, and who has descended upon earth for
its protection, will this day call me by my
name. Glory to that being, whose deceptive
adoption of father, son, brother, friend,
mother, and relative, the world is unable to
penetrate. Glory to him, who is one with true
knowledge, who is inscrutable, and through
whom, seated in his heart, the Yogi crosses the
wide expanse of worldly ignorance and
illusion.
बज्विभिर्यज्ञपूरुषी वासुदेवश्च सात्वतै:।

वेदान्तेदिभिविष्णु: प्रोच्यते यो नतोऽस्मि तम्॥ १६॥

यथा तत्र जगद्धाम्नि धातर्य्यतत् प्रतिष्ठितम्।

सदसत् तेन सत्येन मय्यसौ ag सौम्यताम्।। १७॥

स्मृते सकलकल्याण-भाजनं यत्र जायते।

पुरुषस्तमजं नित्यं व्रजामि शरणं हरिम्।। १८॥

I bow to him, who, by the performers of
holy rites, is called the male of sacrifice
(Yajfia-purusa): by pious worshippers is
termed Vasudeva; and by the cultivators of
philosophy, Visnu. May he in whom cause and
effect, and the world itself, is comprehended,
be propitious to me, through his truth; for
always do I put my trust in that unborn, eternal
Hari; by meditation on whom, man becomes
the repository of all good things.”

पराशर उवाच
set सञ्चिन्तयन् विष्णुं भक्तिनम्रात्ममानस:।
अक्रूरो गोकुलं wre: किञ्चित् सूर्ये विराजति ॥१९॥
स ददर्श तदा तत्र कृष्णमादोहने गवाम्।
वत्समध्यगतं फुललनीलोत्पलदलच्छविम्।॥ २०॥
अस्पष्टपद्मपत्राक्षं श्रीवतसाङ्कितवक्षसम्।
प्रलम्बबाहुमायामि तुङ्गोर:स्थलमुन्नसम्।। २ १॥
सविलासस्मिताधारं विभ्राणं मुखपङ्कुजम्।
तुङ्गरक्तनखं पद्भ्यां धरण्या सुप्रतिष्ठितम्॥ २ २॥
विभ्राणं वाससी पीते वन्यपुष्पविभूषितम्।
सार्द्रनीललताहस्तं सिताम्भोजावतंसकम्।। २३॥

TAY बलभद्रञ्च ददर्श यदुनन्दनम्॥ २४॥
प्रांशुमुन्नतबाह्वंसं विकाशिमुखपङ्कजम्।
मेघपालग्परिंबृतकेलत्साद्गिप्रिवण्या।।र५।।

His mind thus animated by devout faith,
and meditating in this manner, Akrira
proceeded on his road, and arrived at Gokula a
little before sunset, at the time of the milking
of the cows; and there he saw Krsna amongst
the cattle, dark as the leaf of the full blown
lotus; his eyes of the same colour, and his
breast decorated with the, Srivatsa mark; long
armed, and broad chested; having a high nose,
and a lovely countenance, brightened with
mirthful smiles; treading firmly on the ground,
with feet whose nails were tinted red; clad in
yellow garments, and adorned with a garland
of forest flowers; having a fresh-gathered
creeper in his hand, and a chaplet of white
lotus flowers on his head, Akrira also beheld
there Balabhadra, white as a jasmine, a swan,
or the moon, and dressed in blue raiment;
having large and powerful arms, and a
countenance as radiant as a lotus in bloom;
like another Kailaésa mountain, crested with a
wreath of clouds.

तौ दृष्टवा विकसद्वक्त्रसरोज: स महामति:।
पुलकाञ्जितसर्वाङ्गस्तदाक्रूरोऽभवन्मुन्ने।। २६॥
एतत् तत् परमं धाम तदेतत् परमं पदम्।
भगवद्वासुदेवांशो द्विधा योऽयमवस्थित:।। २७॥

दृष्टे जगद्धातरि यातमुच्चै:।
Weg भगवत् प्रसादाद्
दत्तेऽङ्गसङ्गे फलवन्मम स्यात्॥ २८॥
अप्येष पृष्ठे मम हस्तपद्मं
करिंष्यतिश्रोपदनन्तमूत्तिं
रवाप्यते सिद्धिरनाशदोषा।।२९।।
येनाग्निविद्युद्रविरश्मिमाला
करालमत्युग्रमपास्य चक्रम्।
चक्रं घ्नता दैत्यपतेर्हृतानि
दैत्याङ्गनानां नयनाञ्जनानि।। ३ 0
