276

THE VISNU-PURANAM

fortnight; the thirteenth of Nabha (July, offerings made on the day of new moon when
August) and the fifteenth of Magha (January. Ardrd is the lunar mansion.

February), in the dark fortnight; are called by
ancient teachers the anniversaries of the first
day of a Yuga or age (Yugfdya) and are
esteemed most sacred. On these days, water
mixed with sesamun-seeds should be regularly
presented to the progenitors of mankind; as
well as on every solar and lunar eclipse; on the
eighth lunations of the dark fortnights of
Agrahayana, Magha and Phalguna
(December—February); on the two days
commencing the solstices, when the nights and
days alternately begin to diminish; on those
days which are the anniversaries of the
beginning of the Manvantaras; when the sun is
in the path of the goat; and on all occurrences
of meteoric phenomena. A Sraddha at these
seasons contents the Pitrs for a thousand years
: such is the secret which they have imparted.

माघासिते पञ्चदशी कदाचि-
safe ant यदि वारुणेन।
AAT काल: स पर: पितॄणां
न ह्यल्पपुण्यैर्नृप! लभ्यतेऽसौ॥ १५॥
काले धनिष्ठा यदि are तस्मिन्
भवन्ति yore! तदा पितृभ्य:।
दत्त जलान्नं प्रददाति oft
वर्षायुतं तत् कुलजैर्मनुष्यै:।। १६॥
काले यथावत्कियते पितृभ्य:।
श्राद्धं परा तृप्तिमुपेत्य तेन
युगं समग्रं पितर: स्वपन्ति।। १७॥
The fifteenth day of the dark half of the
month Méagha, when united with the

conjunction of the asterism over which Varuna
presides (Satabhisa), is a season of no little

सरस्वतीं नैमिषगोमतीं an
तत्रावगाह्यार्चनमादरेण

कृत्वा पितॄणां दुरितानि हन्ति।। १८॥
गायन्ति चैतत् पितर: कदा नु

वर्षामघ्रातृप्तिमवाप्य भूय:।
माघासितान्ते

areata तृप्तिं तनयादिदत्तै:।। १९॥
चित्तञ्च वित्तञ्च got विशुद्धं

शस्तश्च काल: कथितो विधिश्च।

Or प्रयच्छन्त्यभिवाञ्छितानि॥ २०॥
पितृगीतास्तथैवात्र श्लोकास्तांश्च शृणुष्व मे।
Tea तथैव भव्रता भाव्यं AT दृतात्मना।। २१।।
अकुर्वन् वित्तशाट्यं a: पिण्डान्नो निर्वपिष्यति।। २ २॥
विभवे सति विप्रेभ्यो योऽस्मानुद्दिश्य दास्यति।। २३॥
STAT वा यथाशक्त्या कालेऽस्मिन् भक्तिनम्रधी:।
भोजयिष्यति विप्राग्र्यांस्तन्मात्रविभवो नर:॥ २४॥
असमर्थोऽन्नदानस्य धान्यामं स्वशक्तित:।
प्रदास्यति द्विजाग्रेभ्य: स्वल्पाल्यां वापि दक्षिणाम्।। २५॥
तत्राप्यसामर्थ्ययुत: कराग्राग्रस्थितांस्तिलान्।
प्रणम्य द्विजमुख्याय कस्मैचिद् भूप! दास्यति।। २६॥
भक्तिनम्र: समुद्दिश्य भुव्यस्माकं प्रदास्यति॥ Vol
सर्वाभावे वनं गत्वा कक्षामूलप्रदर्शक:।
सूर्यादिलोकपालानामिदमुच्चैर्वदिष्यति॥ २९॥

"He who, after having offered food and

sanctity, when offerings are especially libations to the Pitrs, bathes in the Ganges,
graceful to the progenitors. Food and water Sutlej, Vipasaa (Beyah), Sarasvati or the
presented by men who are of respectable Gomati at Naimisa, expiates all his sins. The
families, when the asterism Dhanistha is Pitrs also say, "After having received
combined with the day of new moon, content satisfaction for a twelve month, we shall
the Pitrs for ten thousand years; while they further derive gratification by libations offered
repose for a whole age when satisfied by by our descendants at some place of
