BOOK IV, 12 355

Sujatas, are not commonly specified, it is said,
‘from their great number.’ They are in all
probability invented by the compiler out of the
names of the text, Bharata and Sujati. The situation
of these tribes is central India, for the capital of the
Talajaighas was Mahismati or Culi-Mahesvara,
still called, according to Tod, Shasra-bahukibasti,
‘the village of the thousand-armed;’ that is, of
Karttavirya. Annals of Rajasthan, 1. 39. n. The
Tundikeras and Vitihotras are placed in the
geographical lists behind the Vindhyan mountains
and the termination-kaira is common in the valley
of the Narmada, as Bairkaira or we may nave
Tundikera abbreviated, as Tundari on the Tapti.
The Avantyas were in Ujjayin and the Bhojas were
in the neighbourhood probably of Dhar in Malva.
These tribes must have preceded, then, the Rajput
tribes, by whom these countries are now occupied
or Rathores, Chauhans, Pawars, Ghelotes and the
rest. There are still some vestiges of them and a
tribe of Haihayas still exists, at the top of the valley
of Sohagpur in Bhagel-khanda, aware of their
ancient lineage and though few in number,
celebrated for their valour. Tod's Rajasthan, 1. 39.
The scope of the traditions regarding them,
especially of their overrunning the country, along
with Sakas and other foreign tribes, in the reign
preceding that of Sagara (see Bk. IV, Ch. IID),
indicates their foreign origin also; and if we might
trust to verbal resemblances, we might suspect that
the Hayas and Haihayas of the Hindus had some
connection with the Hia, Hoiei-ke, Hoiei-hu and
similarly denominated Hun or Turk tribes, who
make a figure in Chinese history. Des Guignes,
Histoire des Huns, 1.7, 55, 231, Il. 253. At the same
time it is to be observed that these tribes do not
make their appearance until some centuries after
the Christian era and the scene of their first exploits
is far from the frontiers of India : the coincidence
of appellation may be therefore merely accidental.
In the word Haya, which properly means 'a horse,’
it is not impossible, however, that we have a
confirmatory evidence of the Scythian origin of the
Haihayas, as Tod supposed; although we cannot
with him imagine the word ‘horse’ itself is derived
form haya. Rajasthan, I. 76.
३०३९ ३९
