256

वैखानसो वापि भवेत् waste वा यथेच्छया।
पूर्वसङ्कल्पितं wep तादृक् कुर्यान्नराधिप।। १५॥

"When he has finished his studics and
given the parting donation to his preceptor, the
man who wishes to lead the life of a
householder must take a wife. If he does not
propose to enter into the married state, he may
remain as a student with his teacher, first
making a vow to that effect and employ
himself in the service of his preceptor and of
that preceptor's descendants; or he may at once
become a hermit or adopt the order of the
religious mendicant, according to his original
determination.”

वर्षैरेकगुणां भार्यामुद्वहेत् त्रिगुण: स्वयम्।
नातिकेशामकेशां वा नातिकृष्णां न पिङ्गलाम्।। १६॥
निसर्गतो विकलाङ्गीमधिकाङ्गीञ्च weed

नावशुद्धां सरोगां वाऽकुलजां वातिरोगिणीम्।। १७॥
न दुष्टां दुष्टवाचाटां safest पितृ-मातृत:।

न श्मश्रुव्यञ्जनवतीं न चैव पुरुषाकृतिम्।। १८॥

न घर्धरस्वरां क्षाम-वाक्यां काकस्वरां न च।
नानिबद्धेक्षणा tag वृत्ताक्षीं नोद्दहेद बुध:॥ १९॥
यस्याश्च रोमशे जङ्घे गुल्फौ यस्यास्तथोन्नतौ।
गण्डयो: कूपकौ यस्या हसन्त्यास्तां न MBIT Vo
Teed तादृशीं कन्यां wa: कार्यविशारद:।
नातिरुक्षच्छविं पाण्डु करजामरुणेक्षणाम्॥ २१॥
आपीनहस्तपादाञ्च न कन्यामुद्दहेद् बुध:।

न वामनां नातिदीर्घा aged संहतभ्रुवम्॥ २ २॥

न चातिच्छिद्रदशनां न करालमुखीं नर:।

पञ्चमीं मातृपक्षाच्च पितृपक्षाच्च सप्तमीम्। २३॥
गृहस्थश्चोदवहेत् Ga न्यायेन विधिना za!

"If he marry, he must select a maiden who
is of a third of his age;’ one who has not too
much hair, but is not without any; one who is
not very black nor yellow complexioned and
who is not from birth a cripple or deformed.
He must not marry a girl who is vicious or
unhealthy, of low origin or labouring under

disease; one who has been il! brought up; one
who talks improperly; one who inherits some

THE VISNU-PURANAM

malady from father or mother ; one who has a
beard or who is of a masculine appearance;
one who speaks thick or thin or croaks like a
raven; one who keeps her eyes shut or has the
eyes very prominent; one who has hairy legs
or thick-ankles or one who has dimples in her
cheeks when she laughs.* Let not a wise and
prudent man marry a girl of such a description
: nor let a considerate man wed a girl of a
harsh skin; or one with white nails; or one
with red eyes; or with very fat hands and feet;
one who is a dwarf or who is very tall; or one
whose eyebrows meet or whose tecth are fat
apart and resemble tusks. Let a householder
marry a maiden who is in kin at least five
degrees remote from his mother and seven
from his father, with the ceremonies enjoined
by law.’

ब्राह्मो दैवस्तथैवार्ष: प्राजापत्यस्तथासुर:। २४॥
गान्धर्वराक्षसौ चान्यौ पैशाचश्चाष्टमोऽधम:। २५॥
एतेषां यस्य यो धर्मो वर्णस्योक्तो महर्षिभि:।

कुर्वीत दाराहरणम् तेनान्त्यं परिवर्जयेत्। २६॥
सधर्मचारिणीं प्राप्य meet सहितस्तया।
समुद्वहेद् ददात्येषा सम्यगूढा महाफलम्।। २७॥

"The forms of marriage are eight, the
Brahma, Daiva, the Arga, Prajapatya, Asura,
Gandharba, Raksasa and Paisaca; which last is
the worst:'° but the caste to which either form
has been enjoined as lawful by inspired sages
should avoid any other mode of taking a wife.
The householder who espouses a female
connected with him by similarity of religious
and civil obligations and along with her
discharges the duties of his condition, derives
from such a wife great benefits."

NOTES

1. To the Nandimukhas. The Pitrs or progenitors,
are so termed here from words occurring in the
prayer used on the occasion of a festive Sraddha.
As. Res. VII. 270.

2. With the Daiva tirtha, the tips of the fingers;
or with the Prajapatya tirtha, the part of the hand at
the root of the little finger. Manu, II. 58, 59. The
