BOOK VI, CHAP. 6

551

Upon receiving this answer, Kesidwaja
said, “I will go, then, and pay a visit to my foe:
if he kill me, no matter, for then I shall obtain
the reward that attends being killed in a holy
cause; if, on the contrary, he tell me that
penance to perform, then my sacrifice will be
unimpaired in efficacy.”

पराशरं उवाच

इत्युक्त्वारथमारुह्य कृष्णाजिनधरो नृप:।

वनं जगाम यत्रास्ते खाण्डिक्य: स महामति:॥ २०॥

तमायान्तं समालोक्य खाण्डिक्यो रिपुमात्मन:।

प्रोवाच क्रोधताम्राक्ष: समारोपितकार्म्मक:॥ २१॥

Parésara_ continued— Accordingly he

ascended his car, having clothed himself in the
deer skin (of the religious student), and went
to the forest where the wise Khandikya
resided. When Khandikya beheld him
approach, his eyes reddened with rage, and he
took up his bow, and said to him,

खाण्डिक्य sara
जिनं त्वं न्निहंस्यसि।

कृष्णाजिनधरे वेत्सि न मयि प्रहरिष्यति ।। २२॥

मृगाणां वत पृष्ठेषु ye! कृष्णाजिनं न किम्।

येषां त्वया मया चोग्रा: प्रहिता: शितसायका:।॥२३॥

स त्वामहं हनिष्यामि न मे जीवन् विमौक्ष्यसे।

आततायसि दुर्बुद्धे! wa used रिपु:।। २४॥

Khandikya said- “You have armed
yourself with the deer skin to accomplish my
destruction, imagining that in such an attire
you will be safe from me; but, fool, the deer,
upon whose backs this skin is seen, are slain
by you and me with sharp arrows: so will I
slay you; you shall not go free whilst I am
living. You are an unprincipled felon, who

have robbed me of my kingdom, and are
deserving of death.”

केशिध्वज sara
खाण्डिक्य! संशयं प्रष्टुं भवन्तमहमागत:।
न त्वां हन्तुं विचार्यैतत् कोपं वाणञ्च मुञ्च aH २५॥

To this Kesidhwaja answered, “I have
come hither, Khandikya, to ask you to solve
my doubts, and not with any hostile intention:
lay aside therefore both your arrow and your
anger.”
पराशर उवाच

aa: स fae: सार्द्धमेकान्ते सुपुरोहित:।
मन्त्रयामास खाण्डिक्य: waa महामति:।। २६॥
तमूचुर्मन्रिणो वध्यो रिपुरेष वशं गत:।

हते तु पृथिवी wal मम वश्या भविष्यति।॥ २७॥
खाण्डिक्यश्चाह तान् सर्वानितदेवं न संशय:।

हते तु पृथिवी सर्वा मम वश्या भविष्यति।। २८॥
परलोकजयस्तस्य पृथिवी सकला मम।

न हन्मि चेल्लोकजयो मम तस्य वसुन्धरा।

नाहं WAY लोकजयादधिका स्याद् वसुन्धरा।। २९॥
परलोकजयोऽनन्त: स्वल्पकालो महीजय:।
तस्मादेनं न हिंसिष्ये यत् पृच्छति वदामि तत्॥ ३ ०॥
ततस्तमभ्युपेत्याह खाण्डिक्यजनको रिपुम्।

प्रष्टव्यं यत्त्वया ad तत् पृच्छस्व वदाम्यहम् ॥३१॥

ParaSara said— Thus spoken to, Khandikya
retired a while with his counsellors and his
priest, and consulted with them what course to
pursue. They strongly urged him to slay
Kesidhwaja, who was now in his power, and
by whose death he would again become the
monarch of the whole earth. Khandikya
replied to them, “It is no doubt true that by
such an act I should become the monarch of
the whole earth: he, however, would thereby
conquer the world to come; whilst the earth
would be mine. Now if I do not kill him, I
shall subdue the next world, and leave him this
earth. It seems to me that this world is not of
more value then the next; for the subjugation
of the next world endures for ever; the
conquest over this is but for a brief season. I
will therefore not kill him, but tell him what
he wishes to know.”

wa: wd यथावृत्तं धर्म्मधेनुवधं द्विज।
कथयित्वा स पप्रच्छ प्रायश्चितं fe तद्गतम्।। ३ २॥
