478

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Although the wicked king of Magadha,
Jarasandha, was defeated, yet Krsna knew that
whilst he escaped alive he was not subdued,
and in, fact he soon returned with a mighty
force, and was again forced by Rama and Krs
na to fly, Eighteen times’ did the haughty
prince of Magadha renew his attack upon the
Yadavas, headed by Krsna; and was as often
defeated and put to the rout by them, with very
inferior numbers.

we बलं यादवानां aed यदनेकश:।

ay सन्निधिमाहात्मयं विष्णोरंशस्य चक्रिण:।। १३॥
मनुष्यधर्मशीलस्य लीला सा जगत: पते:।
अस्त्राणयनेकरूपाणि यदरातिषु Wafer evn
मनसैव जगत्सृष्टिं संहारञ्च करोति य:।
तस्यारिपक्षक्षपणे कोऽयमुद्यमविस्तर:।। १५॥
तथापि यो मनुष्याणां धर्मस्तमनुवर्त्तते।

कुर्वन् बलवता ate ggg करोत्यसौ॥ १६॥
साम चोपप्रदानञ्च तथा भेदं प्रदर्शयन्।

करोति दण्डपातञ्जच क्वचिदेव पलायनम्।। १७॥
मनुष्यदेहिनां चेष्टामित्येवमनुवर्त्तत:।

लीला जगत्पतेस्तस्य च्छन्दत: सम्प्रवर्त्तते।। १८॥

That the Yadavas were not overpowered by
their foes, was owing to the nresent might of
the portion of the discusarmed Visnu. It was
the pastime of the lord of the universe, in his
capacity of man, to launch various weapons
against his enemies; for what effort of power
to annihilate his foes could be necessary to
him, whose fiat creates and destroys the
world? but as subjecting himself to human
customs, he formed alliances with the brave,
and engaged in hostilities with the base. He
had recourse to the four devices of policy, or
negotiation, presents, sowing dissension, and
chastisement; and sometimes even betook
himself to flight. Thus imitating the conduct of
human beings, the lord of the world pursued at
will his sports.

NOTES

1 See Bk. IV. Ch. XIX.

2 With twenty-three Aksouhinis, each consisting
of 109,300 infantry. 65,610 horse, 21,870 chariots,
and as many elephants. The Hari . Vamsa
enumerates, as the allies or tributaries of
Jarasandha, a number of princes ‘from various parts
of India, but this is a gratuitous embellishment.

3. The Bhagavata and Hari Vamsa say ‘seventeen
times.' The latter indulges in a prolix description of
the first encounter; nothing of which occurs in the
Bhagavata, any more than in our text.

wk
