240

THE VISNU-PURANAM

with nectar and ambrosia and who nourishes
mankind with rain; who pours down or
absorbs the waters in the time of the rains, of
cold and of heat. Glory be to Brahma, the sun,
in the form of the three seasons; he who alone
is the dispeller of the darkness of this earth, of
which he is the sovereign lord; to the god who
is clad in the raiment of purity be adoration.

सत्कर्मयोग्यो न जनो नैवाप: शौचकारणम्।
यस्मिन्ननुदिते wet नमो देवाय Gea २१॥
स्पृष्टो यदंशुभिलेकि: क्रियायोग्योऽभिजायते।
पवित्रताकारणाय तस्मै शुद्धात्मने नम:॥ २२॥
नम: सवित्रे सूर्याय भास्कराय विवस्वते।
आदित्यायादिभूताय देवादीनां TAY नम:।। २३॥
हिरण्मयं रथं यस्य केतवोऽमृतधायिन:।
वहन्ति भुवनालोकिचक्षुषं तं नमाम्यहम्॥ २४॥

Glory to the sun, until whose rising man is
incapable of devout acts and water does not
purify and touched by whose rays the world is
fitted for religious rites; to him who is the
centre and source of purification. Glory to
Savitri, to Strya, to Bhaskara, to Vivasvat, to
Aditya, to the first-born of gods or demons. I
adore the eye of the universe, borne in a
golden car, whose banners scatter ambrosia."

पराशर उवाच
इत्येवमादिभिस्तेन स्तूयमान: wa रवि:।
वाजिरूपधर: wre व्रियतामिति वाच्छितम्।। २५॥
याज्ञवल्क्यस्तदा प्राह प्रणिपत्य दिवाकरम्।
यजूंषि तानि मे देहि यानि सन्ति न मे गुरौ।। २६॥
एवमुक्तो eat wet यजूंषि भगवान् रवि:।
अयातयामसंज्ञानि यानि वेत्ति न AAS: २७॥
यजूंषि यैरधीतानि तानि विप्रैर्दविजोत्तम।
वाजिनस्ते समाख्याता: WA: सोऽभवद् AT २८॥
शाखाभेदास्तु तेषां वै दश पञ्च च वाजिनाम्।
काण्वाद्यास्तु महाभाग! याज्ञवल्क्या-प्रवर्तिता:॥ २९॥

`इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे पञ्चमोऽध्याय:।

Thus eulogised by Yajiavalkya, the sun, in
the form of a horse, appeared to him and said,

"Demand what you desire." To which the sage,
having prostrated himself before the lord of
day, replied, "Give me a knowledge of those
texts of the Yajus with which even my
preceptor is unacquainted." Accordingly the
sun imparted to him the texts of the Yajus
called Aydtayama (unstudied), which were
unknown to Vaigampdyana; and because these
were revealed by the sun in the form of a
horse, the Brahmanas who study this portion
of the Yajus are called Vajis (horses). Fifteen
branches of this school sprang from Kanva and
other pupils of Yajfiavalkya.°

NOTES

1. The Vayu divides these into three classes,
containing each nine and discriminated as northern,
middle and eastern : उदीच्य मध्यदेशाश्च प्राच्याश्रैव पृथग्विधा:।
Of these, the chiefs were severally Syamayani,
Aruni and Analavi or Alambi. With some
inconsistency, however, the same authority states
that Vaisampayana composed and gave to his
disciples eighty-six Samhitas.

2. The paralleled passages in the Vayu rather
implies that the agreement was to meet within
seven nights ; ततस्ते सगणा wed वैशम्पायनवरजजिता:। प्रयपु:
सप्तरात्रेण यत्र सन्धि: Seals AAI

3. Also called the black Yajus. No notice of this
legend, as Colebrooke observes (As. Res. VIII.
376), occurs in the Veda itself} and the term
Taittiriya is more rationally accounted for in the
Anukramani or index of the black Yajus. It is there
said that Vaisampayana taught it to Yaska, who
taught it to Taittiri, who also became a teacher;
whence the term Taittiriya, for a grammatical tule
explains it to mean, 'The Taittiriyas are those who
read what was said or repeated by Tittiri ; fafafter
प्रोक्तमधीयते। तैत्रिरीया:॥ Panini, 4.3.102. The legend,
then, appears to be nothing more than a Paurdnik
invention, suggested by the equivocal sense of
Tittiri, a proper name or a partridge. Much of the
myths of the Hinuds, the obviously of that of the
Greeks and Romans originates in this source. It was
not confined, at least amongst the former, to the
case that Creuzer specifies "Telle ou telle
expression cessa d'etre comprise, et l'on inventa des
mythes pour eclair-cir ces nialentendus;" but was
wilfully perpetrated, even where the word was
