BOOK III, CHAP. 10

255

CHAPTER 10
दशमोऽध्याय:
(जातकर्मादिक्रियाया: कन्यायाश्च लक्षणनिरूपणम्)
wR उवाच
कथितं wert चातुर्वर्ण्यक्रियास्तथा।
qa: क्रियामहं श्रोतुमिच्छामि द्विजसत्तम।। en
समाख्याहि भृगुश्रेष्ठ सर्वज्ञो ह्यसि मे मत:॥२॥

Sagara then addressed Aurva and said,
"You have described to me, venerable
Brahmana, the duties of the four orders and of
the four castes. I am now desirous to hear from
you the religious institutes which men should
individually observe, whether they be
invariable, occasional or voluntary. Describe
these to me; for all things are known, chief of
Bhrgu's race, unto you."

और्व उवाच

यदेतदुक्तं भवता नित्यनैमित्तिकाश्रितम्।

तदहं कथयिष्यामि शृणुष्वैकमना नृप।॥३॥
जातस्य जातकर्मादिक्रियाकाण्डमशेषत:।
पुत्रस्य कुर्वीत पिता श्राद्धञ्चाभ्युदयात्मकम्॥४॥
युग्मांस्तु प्राङ्मुखान् विप्रा भोजयेन्मनुजेश्वर!
यथा वृत्तिस्तथा ated पित्र्यं द्विजन्मनाम्॥ ५॥
दध्ना यवै: सवदरैरमिश्रान् पिण्डान् Yer युत:।
नान्दीमुखेभ्यस्तीर्थेन दद्यान् दैवेन पारथिव॥६॥
प्राजापत्येन वा सर्वमुपचारं प्रदक्षिणम्।

कुर्वीतं तत्तथाशेषवृद्धिकालेषु भूपते।॥७॥

To this Aurva replied, "I will communicate
to you, oh king, that which you have asked,
the invariable and occasional rites which men
should perform : do you attend.

"When a son is born, let his father perform
for him the ceremonies proper on the birth of a
child and all other intitatory rites, as well as a
Sraddha, which is a source of prosperity. Let
him feed a couple of Brahmanas, seated with
their faces to the east; and according to his

means offer sacrifices to the gods and
progenitors. Let him present to the manes'
balls of meat mixed with curds, barley and
jujubes, with the part of his hand sacred to the
gods or with that sacred to Prajapati.’ Let’ a
Brahmana perform such a Sraddha, with all its
offerings and circumambulations, on every
occasion of good fortune.’

ततश्च नाम कुर्वीत पितैव दशमेऽहनि।

देवपूर्वं नराख्यं fe शमवर्मादिसंयुतम्।। cit

शर्मेति ब्राह्मणस्योक्तं वर्मेति क्षत्रसंश्रयम्।
गुप्तदासात्मकं नाम प्रशस्तं वैश्य-शूद्रयो:।। ९॥
नार्थहीनं न चाशस्तं नापशब्दयुतं तथा।

नामङ्गल्यं वा जुगुप्स्यं नाम कुर्यात् समाक्षरम्॥१०॥
नातिदीर्घं नातिह्रस्वं नातिगुर्वक्षरान्वितम्।
सुखोचचार्य्यन्तु तन्नाम Hale यत् प्रवणाक्षरम्।। Veit
ततोऽनन्तरसेस्कारसंस्कृतो गुरुवेश्मनि।
चथोक्तविधिमाश्रित्य sate विद्यापरिग्रहम्।। १२॥

Next, upon the tenth day after birth, let the
father give a name to his child; the first term
of which shall be the appellation of a god, the
second of a man, a Sarman or Varman; the
former being the appropriate designation of a
Brahmana, the latter of a warrior; while Gupta
and Dasa are best fitted for the names of
Vaisyas and Sidras.* A name should not be
void of meaning; it should not be indecent, nor
absurd, nor ill-omened, nor fearful; it should
consist of an even number of syllables; it
should not be too long nor too short, nor too
full of long vowels; but contain a due
proportion of short vowels and be easily
articulated. After this dnd the succeeding
initiatory rites,’ the purified youth is to acquire
religious knowledge, in the mode that has been
described, in the dwelling of his spiritual
guide.

गृहीतविद्यो गुरवे seat च गुरुदक्षिणाम्।
गार्हस्थ्यमिच्छन् yore! Hate दारपरिग्रहम्।। १३॥
TAIN वा कालं कुर्यात् सङ्कल्पपूर्वकम्।

गुरो: शुश्रूषणं कुर्यात् तत्पुत्रादेरथापि वा।। १४॥
