252

CHAPTER 9
नवमोऽध्याय:

(ब्रह्मचर्य्यद्याश्रमचतुष्टयवर्णनम्)
aid sara

बाल: क्रृतोपनयनो वेदाहरणतत्पर:।
गुरुगेहे wae yo ब्रह्मचारी समाहित:॥ gH
शौचाचारवता तत्र कार्यं शुश्रूषणं गुरो:।
व्रतानि चरता ग्राह्यो वेदश्च कृतबुद्धिना।। २॥
उभे सन्ध्ये रविं ye! तथैवाम्नि समाहित:।
उपतिष्ठेत्तदा Hate गुरोरप्यभिवादनम्।। ३॥
स्थिते fade asta याते नीचैरासीत् तथासति।
शिष्यो गुरौ quate! प्रतिकूलं न सम्भजेत्॥४॥
अनुज्ञातश्च भिक्षान्नमश्नीयाद् गुरुणा तत:॥५॥
अवगाहेदप: पूर्वमाचार्येणावगाहिता:।
समिञ्जलादिकञ्चास्य कल्यं कल्यमुपानयेत्॥ ६॥

Aurva continued~When the youth has been
invested with the thread of his caste, let him
diligently prosecute the study of the Vedas, in
the house of his preceptor, with an attentive
spirit and leading a life of continence. He is to

THE VISNU-PURANAM

performance of religious rites. In the morning
Sandhya he is first to salute the sun; in the
evening, fire and then to address his preceptor
with respect. He must stand when his master 1s
standing; move when he is walking and sit
beneath him when he is seated; he must never
sit, nor walk, nor stand when his teacher does
the reverse. When desired by him, let him read
the Veda attentively, placed before his
preceptor; and let him eat the food he has
collected as alms, when permitted by his
teacher.' Let him bathe in water which has
first been used for his preceptor's ablutions;
and every morning bring fuel and water and
whatsoever else may be required.

गृहीतग्राह्यवेदश्च ततोऽनुज्ञामवाप्य च।

गार्हस्थ्यमावसेत्प्राज्ञो निष्पन्नगुरुनिष्कृति:।। ७॥

विधिनावाप्तदारस्तु धनं प्राप्य स्वकर्मणा।

शृहस्थकार्यमखिलं wate भूपाल! शक्तित:।॥८॥

निवापेन पितॄनर्चेद् यज्ञैर्देवांस्तथातिथीन्।

अन्नैर्मुनींश्च स्वाध्यायैरपत्येन प्रजापतिम्॥ ९॥।

बलिकर्मणा भूतानि वाकसत्येनाखिलं जगत्।

प्राप्णोति लोकान् पुरुषो निजकर्मसमर्जितान्।। १०॥

भिक्षाभुजश्च ये केचित् परिव्राड्ब्रह्मचारिण:।

तेऽप्यत्रैव प्रतिष्ठन्ते गार्हस्थ्यं तेन वै परम्॥ ११॥

वेदाहरणकार्याय तीर्थस्नानाय च wat!

अटन्ति aqui विप्रा: पृथिवीदर्शनाय च।। १२॥

अनिकेता ह्यनाहारा यत्रसायङ्गृहाश्च ये।

dat गृहस्थ: सर्वेषां प्रतिष्ठा योनिरेव an १३॥

तेषां स्वागतदानादि वक्तव्यं मधुरं नृप।

गृहागतानां SE शयनासनभोजनम्।। १४॥

अतिथिर्यस्य भग्नाशो गृहात् प्रतिनिवर्तते।

स दत्त्वा दुष्कृतं तस्मै पुण्यमादाय गच्छति।। १५॥

"When the scriptural studies appropriate to

the student have been completed and he has
received dismissal from his Guru, let the

regenerate man enter into the order of the
householder; and taking unto himself, with

wait upon his Guru, assiduously observant of jawful ceremonies, house, wife and wealth,

purifactory practices and the Veda is to be
acquired by him, while he is regular in the

discharge to the best of his ability the duties of
