BOOK IV, 13

361

Madhu still came out forth, they concluded
that he must have met his death in the cavern.
"It could not have required so many days,”
they thought "to overcome an enemy;" and
accordingly they departed and returned to
Dvaraka and announced that Krsna had been
killed.

ASRTaT तत्कालोचितमखिलमुपरतक्रियाकलापं
RUE

तत्र तास्य युध्यमानस्यातिश्रद्धादत्तविशिष्टपात्रोपयुक्तान्न-
तोयादिना कृष्णस्य बलप्राणपुष्टिरभूत्। २७॥

इतरस्यानुदिनमतिगुरुपुरुषभिद्यमानस्यातिनिष्ठुरप्रहारपीडिता
ख्रिलवयवस्य निराहारतया ace: Fier भगवता

मित्युक्त:।॥२८॥

TA भगवानरखिलमवनिभारावतारमाचचक्षे।। २९॥
भ्रीत्याञ्जितकरतलस्पर्शनेन चेनमपगतयद्धखेदं
चकारं।। ३ oll

स च प्रणिपत्यैन पुनरपि were जाम्बवतीं am कन्यां
गृहागमनार्ध्यभूतां ग्राहयामास।। ३ et
स्यमन्तकमणिमप्यसौ प्रणिपत्य तस्मै प्रददौ।
अच्युतोऽप्यतिप्रणतात् तस्मादग्राह्यममपि तन्मणिरत्न-
मात्मशोधनाय जग्राह॥३ २॥

When the relations of Acyuta heard this
intelligence, they performed all the obsequial
rites suited to the occasion. The food and
water thus offered to Krsna in the celebration
of his Sriddha served to support his life and
invigorate his strength in the combat in which
he was engaged; while his adversary, wearied
by daily conflict with a powerful foe, bruised
and battered in every limb by heavy blows and
enfeebled by want of food, became unable
longer to resist him. Overcome by his mighty
antagonist, Jimbavant cast himself before him
and said, "You, mighty being, are surely
invincible by all the demons and by the spirits

of heaven, earth or hell; much less are you to
be vanquished by mean and powers creatures
in a human shape; and still less by such as we
are, who are born of brute origin. Undoubtedly
you are a portion of my sovereign lord
Narayana, the defender of the universe." Thus
addressed by Jambavant, Krsna explained to
him fully that he had descended to take upon
himself the burden of the earth and kindly
alleviated the bodily pain which the bear
suffered from the fight, by touching him with
his hand, Jambavant again prostrated himself
before Krsna and presented to him his
daughter Jambavanti, as an offering suitable to
a guest. He also delivered to his visitor the
Syamantaka jewel. Although a gift from such
an individual was not fit for his acceptance,
yet Krsna took the gem for the purpose of
clearing his reputation.

We Wea saan waermeay-

मयास्याभूतमलिनमारोपतिमिति
सत्यभामां भगवते भार्यां ददौ॥ ३४॥

He then returned along with his bride
Jaémbavanti to Dvaraka. When the people of
Dvaraka beheld Krsna alive and returned, they
were filled with delight, so that those who
were bowed down with years recovered
youthful vigour; and all the Yadavas, men and
women, assembled round Anakadundubhi, the
father of the hero and congratulated him. Krs
na related to the whole assembly of the
Yadavas all that had happened, exactly as it
had befallen and restoring the Syamantaka
jewel to Satrajit was exonerated from the
crime of which he had been falsely accused.
He then led Jambavanti into the inner
apartments.
