BOOK L, CHAP. 3

19

ocean, Brahma, whe is one with Narayana,
satiate with the demolition of the universe,
sleeps upon his serpent-bed-contemplated, the
lotus born, by the ascetic inhabitants of the
Janaloka-for a night of equal duration with his
day; at the close of which he creates anew. Of
such days and nights is a year of Brahma
composed; and a hundred such years constitute
his whole life.’ One Pararddha®, or half his
existence. has expircd, terminating with the
Maha Kalpa’ called Padma. The Kalpa (or day
of Brahma) termed Vardaha is the Rest of the
second period of Brahméa's existence.

NOTES

1. Agency depends upon the Raja guna, the
quality of foulness or passion, which is an
imperfection. Perfect being is void of all qualities,
and is therefore inert.

Omnis enim per se divom natura necesse est

Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur :

but if inert for ever, creation could not occur.
The objection is rather evaded than answered. The
ascribing to Brahma of innumerable and
unappreciable properties is supported by the
commentator with vague and scarcely applicable
texts of the Vedas. 'In him there is neither
instrument nor effect : his like, his superior, is
nowhere seen :, न तस्य wel कर्णं च विद्यते न
तत्समश्चाप्यधिकश्च दृश्यते। ‘That supreme soul is the
subjugator of all. the ruler of all. the sovereign of
all ; स चायमात्मा सर्वस्य वशी सर्वस्य शासन: सर्वस्याधिपति: 1 In
various places of the Vedas also it is said that his
power is supreme, and that wisdom. power, and
action are his essential properties ; परास्य शक्तिर्विविधैश्च
श्रूयते स्वाभाविकी ज्ञानबलक्रिया च। The origin of creation is
also imputed in the Vedas to the rise of will or
desire in the Supreme: सोऽकामयत बहु स्यां प्रजायेय। ‘He
wished I may become manifold. I may create
creatures.’ The Bhagavata expresses the same
doctrine : 'The Supreme Being was before all things
alone, the soul and lord of spiritual substance ; in
consequence of his own will he is secondarily
defined, as if of various minds: भगवानेक आसेदमग्र्य
आत्मात्मनां बिभु:। आत्मेच्छानुगतावात्मा नानामत्युपलक्षण:॥ This
will however, in the mysticism of the Bhagavata, is
personified as Maya ; सा वा एतस्य dep: शक्ति:

। माया नाम महाभाग ययेदं निर्ममे विभु:॥ ‘She (that

desire) was the energy of the Supreme, who was
contemplating (the uncreated world); and by her.
whose name is Maya, the Lord made the universe.’
This, which was at first a mere poetical
personification of the divine will. came, in such
works, as the Bhagavata, to denote a female
divinity, co-equal and co-eternal with the First
Cause. It may be doubted if the Vedas authorize
such a mystification, and no very decided vestige of
it occurs in the Visnu Purana,

2. This term is also applied to a different and still
more protracted period. See b. VI. c. 3.

3. The last proportion is rather obscurely
expressed ; तास्तु त्रिं विधि:। 'Thirty of them
(Kalas) are the rule for the Muhirtta.'’ The
commentator says it means that thirty Kalas make a
Ghatika (or Ghari), and two Ghatikds a Muhirtta,
but his explanation is gratuitous, and is at variance
with more explicit passages elsewhere, as in the
Matsya त्रिंशत् कलाश्चैव भवेन्मुहूर्त्त:। : Muhirtta is thirty
Kalas. Im these divisions of the twenty-four hours
the Kirma, Markandeya, Matsya, Vayu and Liga
Puranas exactly agree with our authority. In Manu.
1, 64, we have the same computation, with a
difference in the first article, eighteen Nimesas
being one Kasth4. The Bhavisya Purana follow
Manu in that respect, and agrees in the rest with the
Padma, which has,

15 Nimesas = 1 Kastha 30 Kasthds = 1 Kala

30 Kalés =1Ksana 12 Ksanas= 1 Muhirtta

30 Muhiirrttas = | day and night.

In the Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma, it is said
that thirty Kalis and one-tenth, or, according to the
commentator, thirty Kalis and three Kasthas make a
Muhirtta. A still greater variety, however, occurs in
the Bhagavata and in the Brahma Vaivartta Purana
These have,

2 Paramaénus == 1Anu 3Anus = 1 Trasarenu

3 Trasarenus == | Truti 100 Trutis == 1 Vedha

3 Vedhas =1 Lava 3 Lavas = 1 Nimesa
3.Nimesas = 1 Ksana 5 Ksanas =] Kastha

15 Kasthads = 1 Laghu 1S Laghus = 1 Narika
2Narikés = 1 Muhartta 6 or 7 Narik’s = । Yama. Or

watch of the day or night
Allusions to this or either of the proceeding
computations, or to any other, have not been found
in either of the other Puranas: yet the work of
Gopala Bhatta, from which Colebrooke states he
derived his information on the subject of Indian
