BOOK V, CHAP. 37

515

Maitreya said—Tell me how Janarddana
effected the destruction of his own race under
the plea of Brahmanical imprecation, and in
what manner he relinquished his mortal body.’
पराशर उवाच

विश्वामित्रस्तथा कण्वो नारदश्च महामुनि:।
पिण्डारके महीतीर्थे दृष्टा यदुकुमारकै:॥६॥
ततस्ते यौवनोन्मत्ता भाविकार्य्यप्रचोदिता:।
शाम्बं जाम्बवतीपुत्रं भूषयित्वा fers यथा।। ७॥
प्रसतांस्तान्मुनीनूचु: प्रणिपातपुर:सरम्।

sa स्त्री पुत्रकामस्य बभ्रो: fe जनयिष्यति।। ci

ParaSara ऽवार्प- At the holy place
Pindaraka,’ Visvamitra, Kanva. and the great
sage Narada. were observed by some boys of
the Yadu tribe. Giddy with youth. and
influenced by predestined results, they dressed
and adorned Samba, the son of Jambavati as a
damsel, and conducting hcr to the sages, they
addressed them with the usual marks of
reverence, and said. “What child this femalc,
the wife of Babhru. who is anxious to have a
son. give birth to ?” The sages, who were
possessed of divine wisdom, were very angry
to find themselves thus tricked by the boys.
and said. “She will bring forth a club, that
shall crush the whole of the Yadava race.”

पराश्रं उवाच
दिव्याज्ञानोपपन्नास्ते विप्रलब्धा: कुमारकै:।
मुनय: कुपिता: प्रोचुर्मुषलं जनयिष्यति।
येनाखिलकुलोत्सादो यादवानां भविष्यति।। ९॥
इत्युक्तास्तै: कुमारास्ते आचचक्षुर्यथाकृतम्।
उग्रसेनाय मुसलं जज्ञे शाम्बस्य चोदरात्।। १०॥
तदुग्रसेनो मुसलमयश्चूर्णमकारयत् |
जज्ञे स चैरकाश्चूर्ण: प्रक्षिप्तस्तैर्महोदधौ॥ ११॥
मुसलस्याय लोहस्त चूर्णितस्यान्धकैद्दिज।
खण्डं चूर्णयितुं शेकुनैकं ते तोमराकृति।। १२॥
तदप्यम्बुनिधौ fad मत्स्यो sare घातिभि:।
घातितस्योदरात् तस्य लुब्धो जग्राह तं जरा।। १३॥
विज्ञातपरमार्थोऽपि भगवान् मधुसूदन:।

नैच्छत्तदन्यथाकर्त्त विधिना यत् समीहितम्।। १४॥

The boys. thus spoken to by the sage, went
and related all that had occurred to Ugrasena;
and, as foretold, a club was produced from, the
belly of Samba. Ugrasena had the club, which
was of iron. ground to dust, and thrown into
the sea, but the particles of dust there became
tushes.* There was one part of the’ iron club
which was like the bladc of a lance, and which
the Andhakas could not break: this, when
thrown into the sea, was swallowed by a fish;
the fish was caught, the iron spike was
extracted from its belly, and was taken by a
hunter named Jara. The all-wise and glorious
Madhusiidana did not think fit to counteract
what had been predetermined by fate.

देवैश्च प्रहितो दूत: प्रणिपत्याह केशवम्।
रहस्येवमहं दूत: प्रहितो भगवन् Yt: ॥१५॥
विज्ञापयति यच्छक्रस्तदिदं श्रूयतां प्रभो।। १६॥
भारावतारणार्थाय वर्षाणामधिकं शतम्।
भगवानवतीर्णोऽत्र त्रिदशै: सम्प्रसादित:।। १७॥
त्वया सनाथास्तिदशा भवन्तु त्रिदिवे पुन:।। १८॥
तदतीतं जगन्नाथ वर्षाणामधिकं शतम्।

इदानीं गम्यतां स्वर्गो भवता यदि रोचते।। १९॥
देवैविज्ञाप्यते चेदमथात्रैव रतिस्तव।

तत् स्थीयतां यथाकालमाख्येयमनुजीविभि:।॥ २०॥

Then there came to Kesgava, when he was
private and alone, a messenger from the gods,
who addressed him with reverence, and said,
“TJ am sent to you. O lord, by the deities, and
do you hear what Indra, together with the
Visvas, Maruts, Adityas, Sadhyas, and Rudras,
respectfully represents. "More than a hundred
years have elapsed since you, in favour to the
gods, has descended upon earth, for the
purpose of relieving it of its load. The demons
have been slain, and the burden of earth has
been removed: now let the immortals once
again behold their monarch in heaven. A
period exceeding a century has passed: now, if
