BOOK V, CHAP. 34

509

worlds. The wielder of the discus knowing that
the fiend had been produced by the son of the
king of Kasi, through his adoration of the deity
whose emblem is a bull, and being engaged in
sportive amusements, and playing at dice, said
to the discus, “Kill this fierce creature, whose
tresses are of plaited flame.” Accordingly
Sudarsgana, the discus of Visnu, immediately
attacked the fiend, fearfully enwreached with
fire, and wearing tresses of plaitcd name.
Terrified at the might of Sudargana, the
creation of Mahesvara awaited not his attack,
but fled with speed, pursued by him with equal
velocity, until she reached Varanasi, repelied
by the superior might of the discus of Visnu.

तत: काशिबलं भूरि प्रमथानां TAT बलम्।
समस्तशस्त्रास्त्रयुतं चक्रस्याभिमुखं ययौ ॥४०॥
शस्त्रास्त्रमोक्षचतुरं दग्ध्वा तद्बलमोजसा।
कृत्यागर्भामशेषां तां दग्ध्वा वाराणसीं पुरीम्।४१॥
सभृद्भृत्यपौरान्तु साश्वमातङ्गमानवाम्।
अशेषकौषकोष्ठां ता दुर्निरीक्ष्या सुरैरपि।।४२॥
ज्वालापरिप्लुतासेष-गृह-प्राकारचत्वराम्।

ददाह तद्धरेश्चकं सकलामेव at पुरीम्।४३॥

अक्षीणामर्षमत्युग्रसाध्यसाधनसस्पृहम्।
तच्चकं प्रस्फुरद्दीप्ति विष्णोरभ्याययौ करम्।।४४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे चतुस्रिंश: अध्याय:॥

The army of Kasi, and the host of the
demigods attendant upon Siva, armed with all
kinds of weapons, then sallied out to oppose
the discus ; but, skilled in the use of arms, he
consumed the whole of the forces by his
radiance, and then set fire to the city, in which
the magic power of Siva had concealed
herself.’ Thus was Varanasi burnt, with all its
princes and their followers, inhabitants,
elephants. horses, and men, treasures: and
granaries, houses, palaces, and markets. The
whole of a city, that was inaccessible to the
gods, was thus wrapped in flames by the
discus of Hari, and was totally destroyed. The
discus then, with unmitigated wrath, and
blazing fiercely, and far from satisfied with

the accomplishment of so easy a task, returned
to the hand of Visnu.’

NOTES

1 From being, the commentator says king of
Pundra, The Bhagavata calls him chief of the Karis
as; the Padma. king of Kasi; but the Bhagavata, as
well as our text, makes the king of Kasi his friend
and ally.

2 According to the Padma Purana, he propitiates
Siva, and obtains from him the insignia which
constitute a Vasudeva. The different authorities for
this legend all use the term Vasudeva in the sense
to a title.

3 The Hari V. and Padma Purana send
Paundraka to Dvdraké. According to the latter,
Narada incites Paundraka to the aggression, telling
him, he cannot be a Vasudeva till he has overcome
Krsna: he goes, and is killed. The former work, as
usual, enters into particulars of its own invention.
Krsna is absent on a visit to Siva at Kailasa, and
during his absence Paundraka, assisted by
Ekalavya, king of the Nisidas, makes a night attack
upon Dvaraka. They are resisted by the Yadavas
under Satyaki and Balaréma, by the former of
whom Paundraka is repeatedly overthrown, and all
but slain : he requires so much killing, however,
that he is likely to obtain the victory, when Krsna
comes to the aid of his kinsmen, and after a
protracted encounter, described in language
employed a hundred times before, kills his
competitor. The whole of the sections called the
Kailésa Yatra. or Krsna's journey to Kailasa, must
have been wanting in the copy used by M.
Langlois. as they are not included in his translation.
The chapters of the Hari V. according to his
enumeration of them are 261: my copy has 316.

4. The Bhagavata names him Sudaksina :
Padma, Dandapfni.

5. A personified Krtyd. a magical creation. The
Padma has the same. The Bhagavata makes the
product of the sacrificial fire a male and sends him
to Dvarakaé, accompained by a host of Bhitas,
Siva's attendant goblins:

6. According to the Bhagavata. the magical,
being himself destroys Sudaksina and his priest; but
Sudarsana consumes the people and the city. The
Padma ascribes the destruction of the king and all
his city to the discus. The Hari V. closes its

the
