558

unconscious, one-footed, two-footed, or many-
footed; all these are the sensible form of Hari,
to be apprehended by the three kinds of
apprehension.

एतत् सर्वमिदं विश्वं जगदेतचराचरम्।

परब्रह्मस्वरूपस्य विष्णो: शक्तिसमन्वितम्॥६०॥

विष्णुशक्ति: परा प्रोक्ता क्षेत्रज्ञाख्या तथापरा।

अविद्या कर्मसंज्ञान्या तृतीया शक्तिरिष्यते।। ६ १॥

यया क्षेत्रज्ञशक्ति: सा वेष्टिता za सर्वगा।

संसारतापनखिलानवाप्नोत्यनुसन्ततान्।। ६ २॥

तया तिरोहितत्वाच्च शक्ति: क्षेत्रज्ञसंज्ञिता।

सर्वभूतेषु OTT! तारतम्येन लक्ष्यते।। ६ ३॥

All this universal world, this world of
moving and stationary beings, is pervaded by
the energy of Visnu, who is of the nature of
the supreme Brahma. This energy is either
supreme, or, when it is that of conscious
embodied spirit, it is secondary. Ignorance, or
that which is denominated from works, is a
third energy;“ by which the omnipresent
energy of embodied spirit is ever excited, and
whence it suffers all the pains of repeated
worldly existence. Obscured by that energy (of
ignorance or illusion), the energy that is
denominated from embodied spirit is
characterised by different degrees of
perfection in all created beings.

अप्राणवत्सु स्वल्पाल्पा स्थावरेषु ततोऽधिका।
सरीसृपेषु तेभ्योऽन्याप्यतिशक्त्या wafer ६४॥
पतत्निभ्यो मृगास्तेभ्य: स्वशक्त्या पशवोऽधिका।
पशुभ्यो मनुजाश्चातिशक्त्या पुंस: प्रभाविता:।।६५॥
तेभ्योऽपि नाग-गनधर्व-यक्षाद्या देवता FT

शक्र: समस्तदेवेभ्यस्ततश्चाति प्रजापति:।॥६६॥
हिरण्यगर्भोऽति तत: पुंस: शक्त्युपलक्षित:।
एतान्यशेषरूपस्य तस्य रूपाणि यार्थिव।। ६७॥
यतस्तच्छक्तियोगेन व्याप्तानि नभसा यथा।

In things without life it exists in a very
small degree: it is more in things that have
life, but are (without motion): in insects it is
still more abundant, and still more in birds; it
is more in wild animals, and in domestic

THE VISNU-PURANAM

animals the faculty is still greater: men have
more of this (spiritual) faculty than animals,
and thence arises their authority over them: the
faculty exists in an ascending degree in Nagas,
Gandharvas, Yaksas, gods, Sakra, Prajapati,
and Hiranyagarbha: and is above all
predominant in that male (Visnu) of whom all
these various creatures are but the diversified
forms, penetrated universally by his energy, as
all-pervading as the ether.

द्वितीयं विष्णुसंज्ञस्य योगिध्येयं महामते।। ६८॥
समस्ता: झक्तयश्चैता FT यत्र प्रतिष्ठिता:।॥। ६ ९॥
तद्बिश्वरूपरूपं वै रूपमन्यद्धरैर्महत्।

समस्तशक्तिरूपाणि A करोति GTN oll

देव-तिर्य्यङ्मनुष्यादिचेष्टावन्ति स्वलीलया।
जगतामुपकाराय न सा कर्मनिमित्तजा।
चेष्टा तस्याप्रमेयस्य व्यापिन्यव्याहतात्मिका॥ ७ 8

“The second’ state of him who is called
Visnu, and which is to be meditated upon by
the (advanced) sage, is that imperceptible,
shapeless form of Brahma, which is called by
the wise, ‘That which is'*, and in which all the
before described energies reside. Thence
proceeds the form of the universal form, the
other great form of Hari, which is the origin of
those manifested forms (or incarnations) that
are endowed with every kind of energy, and
which, whether the forms of gods, animals, or
men, are assumed by him (Hari) in his sport.
This active interposition of the indefinable
god, all-comprehending and irresistible, is for
the purpose of benefiting the world, and is not
the necessary consequence of works.

तदूयं विश्ररूपस्य तस्य योगयुजा नृप!
चिन्त्यमात्मविशुख्ध्यर्थं सर्वकिल्विषनाशनम् ॥७२॥
यथाग्निरुद्धतशिख: कक्षं दहति सानिल:।

तथा चित्तस्थितो विष्णुर्योगिनां सर्वकिल्विषम्।॥७३॥
TAT समस्तशक्तीनामाधारे तत्र चेतस:।

wala संस्थितिं सा तु विज्ञेया शुद्धवारणा॥७४॥
शुभाश्रय: स चित्तस्य सर्वगस्य तथात्मन:।
