BOOK III, CHAP. 15

283

enables the institutor of obsequial rites to
enjoy all his desires.""”
NOTES

1. The Brahmanas here particularised are termed
Trindciketa, Trimadhu and Trisuparna; and are so
denominated, according to the commentator, from
particular parts of the Vedas. The first is so called
from studying or reciting three Anuvakas of the Kat
haka branch of the Yajurveda, commencing with
the term Trinaciketa; the second,, from three
Anuvakas of the same Veda, beginning Madhuvata;
and the third, from a similar portion, commencing
Brahmavan namami. The first and third terms occur
in Manu, III. 185; and Kullika Bhatta explains
Trinaciketa to mean a portion of the Yajurveda and
the Brahmana who studies it and Trisuparna, a part
of the Rk and the Brahmana who is acquainted with
it. The Nirnaya Sindhu explains the terms in a like
manner, but calls the Trisuparna as well as the
Trindciketa prayers, portions of the Yajus. The
Trimadhu it assigns to the Rk. Other explanations
are also given to the terms Trindciketa and
Trisuparna : the first being explained a Brahmana
who thrice performs the ceremony called Cayana;
and the last, one who, after the seven ascending
generations, worships the Pitrs termed Somapas.
These explanations are however considered less
correct than the preceding and which are thus given
in the authority cited :
तद्वतेन तदध्यायिनौ। त्रिमधु: ऋॠग्वेदैकदेश:तदध्यायी।।

2. For the six Angas, see Bk. III. Ch. VI.

3. So the commentator distinguishes the Vedavit,
the Brahmana who understands the meaning of the
text of the Vedas, from the Srotriya, who practises
the rites he studies.

4. Portions of the Saéman contained in the
Aranyaka are called the Jyestha, ‘elder’ or 'principal’
Saman.

5. Manu, IIT. 150.

6. As two or five at a ceremony dedicated to the
gods; three at the worship of the Pitrs. (Nirnaya
Sindhu, p. 311). ,

7. The worship of the Visvadevas (see Bk.III.
Ch. XIV) forms a part of the general Sraddhas and
of the daily sacrifices of the householder.
According to the Vayu this was a privilege
conferred upon them by Brahma and the Pitrs, as a
reward for religious austerities practised by them

upon Himalaya. Their introduction as a specific
class seems to have originated in the custom of
sacrificing to the gods collectively or to all the
gods, as the name Visvadevas implies. They
appear, however, as a distinct class in the Vedas
and their assumption of this character is therefore
of ancient date. The daily offering to them’ is
noticed by Manu, II. 90, 172; and offerings to ‘the
gods' are also enjoined at the beginning and end of
a Sriddha. Kullika Bhatta understands here the
Visvadevas and it probably is so; but in another
verse different divinities are specified : "First
having satisfied Agni, Soma, Yama with clarified
butter, let him proceed to satisfy the manes of his
progenitors." See As. Res. VII. 265, 271, etc.

8. The text is तदनुज्ञया 'with their assent’; but no
noun occurs in the sentence with which the relative
is connected. It must mean the Brahmanas,
however, as in this passage of Vrddha Paragara;
‘Let the sacrificer place his left hand on the
Brahmana's right keen and say, "Shall I invoke the
Visvadevas?" and being desired to invoke them, let
him address them with the two maniras,
"Visvedevas, he is comc! Visvadevas, hear him!"
we: सव्यकरं न्यस्य fox दक्षिणजानुनि। देवानावाहयिष्येऽहमिति
वाचमुदीरयेत्।। आवाहयेत्यनुज्ञातो विश्वेदेवा स आगत: विश्वेदेवा
शृणुतेममिति मंत्रद्वयं पठेत्।।

9. This notion occurs more than once in the
Vayu, in nearly the same words : faa हि विप्ररूपेण
चरन्ति पृथिवीमिमाम्। तस्मादतिथिमायान्तमभिगच्छेत् कृतांजलि:।।

10. This places the initiatoty oblations noticed by
Manu (see Supra note 7) subsequent to the
offerings to the Visvadevas.

11. The Raksoghna mantra ; the extinguishing of
a lamp, lighted to keep off evil spirits, which is
accompanied by a mantra or prayer. As. Res. VII.
274.

12. Part of this passage is in the words of Manu,

INL. 207 ; अवकाशेषु चोक्षेषु जलतीरेषु चैवहि। It is omitted in

‘ the MSS. in the Bengali character.

13. Manu, III. 216.

14. "Then let the Bréhmanas address him saying,
‘Svadha!’ for in all ceremonies relating to deceased
ancestors, the world Svadhd is the highest benison."
Manu, IIT. 252.

15. We have here the words of Manu : त्रीणि श्राद्धे
`पवित्राणि दौहित्रं कुतपस्तिला:। II. 235. ‘Three things are
held pure at such obsequies, the daughter's son, the
Nepal blanket and sesamum-seed.' Sir Wm. Jones's
translation of these terms rests upon the explanation
