BOOK IV, 24 ।

दौर्बल्यमेव अव्रृत्तिहेतु: भयगर्भोच्चारणमेव
पाण्डित्यहेतु:॥ २३॥

दानमेव धर्म्महेतु:, आढ्यतैव साधुत्वहेतु:।। २४॥

Wealth and piety will decrease day by day,
until the world will be wholly depraved. Then
property alone will confer rank; wealth will be
the only source of devotion; passion will be
the sole bond of union between the sexes;
falsehood will be the only means of success in
litigation; and women will be objects merely
of sensual gratification. Earth will be
venerated but for its mineral treasures;” the
Brahmanical thread will constitute a
Braéhmana; external types (as the staff and red
garb) will be the only distinctions of the
several orders of life; dishonesty will be the
universal means of subsistence; weakness will
be the cause of dependence; menace and
presumption will be substituted for learning;
liberality will be devotion;

व्रिवाहहेतु:,

सद्वैशघाव्येविपात्रदूरायतनौक्कपेवतौर्थमित्वेवपनेक्तोपोत्तरे
भूमण्डले सर्ववर्णेष्वेव यो यो बलवान् स स
भूपतिर्भविष्यति। एवञ्चातिलुब्धयकरभारसहा:

द्रोणी: प्रजा: संश्रविष्यन्ति। मधुशाकमूलफलपत्रपुष्पाहसाराश्च
भविष्यन्ति, तरुवल्कालचीरप्रावरणाश्चातिबहुप्रजा:
शीतवातातपवर्षसहा भविष्यन्ति न a कश्चित्:
त्रयोविंशतिवर्षाणि जीविष्यति। अनवरतं ua कलियुगे
क्षयमायात्माखिलनेवैष जन: क्षयमुपैष्यति।। २५॥

simple ablution will be purification;”
mutual assent will be marriage; fine clothes
will be dignity;” and water afar off will be
esteemed a holy spring. Amidst all castes he
who is the strongest will reign over a
principality thus vitiated by many faults. The
people, unable to bear the heavy burdens
imposed upon them by their avaricious
sovereigns, will take refuge amongst the
valleys of the mountains and will be glad to
feed upon wild honey, herbs, roots, fruits,
flowers and leaves : their only covering will be
the bark of trees and they will be exposed to
the cold and wind and sun and rain. No man's

395

life will exceed three and twenty years. Thus
in the Kali age shall decay constantly proceed,
until the human race approaches its
annihilation.

श्रौतस्मार्त्तधर्मं विप्लवमत्यन्तमुपगते क्षीणप्राये च
कलावशेषजगत्स्रष्टुश्चराचरगुरोदिमयस्यान्तमयस्य सर्वमयस्य
ब्रह्ममयास्यात्मस्वरूपिणो भगवतो वासुदेवस्यांश:
सम्भलग्रामप्रधानब्राह्मणविष्णुयशसो गृहे अष्टगुणद्धि-
समन्वित:) कल्किरूपी जगत्यत्रावतीर्य सकलम्लेच्छदस्यु-
करिष्यति।। २६॥

When the practices taught by the Vedas
and the institutes of law shall nearly have
ceased and the close of the Kali age shall be
nigh, a portion of that divine being who exists
of his own spiritual nature in the character of
Brahma and who is the beginning and the end
and who comprehends all things, shall descend
upon earth : he will be born in the family of
Visnuyasas, an eminent Brahmana of
Sambhala village, as Kalki, endowed with the
eight superhuman faculties. By his irresistible
might he will destroy all the Mlecchas and
thieves and all whose minds are devoted to
iniquity.

स्वधर्म्मषु चाखिलं जगत् संस्थापयिष्यतीति।
wert wt wa
जनपदानाममलस्फटिकविशुद्धमतयो भविष्यन्ति।। २७॥

He will then re-establish righteousness
upon earth; and the minds of those who live at
the end of the Kali age shall be awakened and
shall be as pellucid as crystal.

तेषाञ्च ब्रीजभूतानामशेषमनुष्याणां परिणतानामपि a
कालकृतानामपत्यप्रसूतिर्भविष्यति।। २८॥

तानि च तदपत्यानि कृतयुगधर्म्मनुसारीणि
भविष्यन्तीति।। २९॥

The men who are thus changed by virtue of
that peculiar time shall be as the seeds of
human beings and shall give birth to race who
shall follow the laws of the Krta age or age of
purity.

अत्रोच्यते

ard
