208

THE VISNU-PURANAM

alarmed, jumped out of the water upon the
bank.

अत्युच्चारोहणेनास्या नद्यां गर्भ: पपात A १५॥
तमुह्यमानं वेगेन वीचिमालापरिप्लुतम्।

जग्राह स Tat गर्भात् पतितं मृगपोतकम्॥ १६॥
गर्भप्रच्युतिदोषेण प्रोत्तुङ्गाक्रमणेन च।

मैत्रेय! सापि हरिणी पपात च ममार च।। १७॥
efit at विलोक्याथ विपन्नां नृपतापस:।
भृगपोतं समादाय निजमाश्रममागत:।। १८॥
चकारानुदिनञ्जासौ मृगपोतस्य वै नृप:।

पोषणं पुष्यमाणश्च स तेन aga WA १९॥
चचाराश्रमपर्यन्तं तृणानि गहनेषु स:।

दूरं गत्वा च शार्द्दलत्रासादभ्याययौ पुन:॥ २०॥
प्रातर्गत्वातिदूरञ्च सायमायाद् यथाश्रमम्।
पुनश्च भरतस्याभूदाश्रमस्योटजाजिरे।। २ १॥

In consequence of this great leap, her fawn
was suddenly brought forth, and fell into the
river; and the king, seeing it carricd away by
the eurrent, caught hold of the young animal,
and saved it from being drowned. The injury
reeeived by the decr, by her violent cxertion,
proved fatal, and she lay down, and died;
which being observed by the royal ascetie, he
took the fawn in his arms, and returned with it
to his hermitage : there he fed it and tended it
everyday, and it throve and grew up under his
care. It frolicked about the cell, and grazed
upon the grass in its vicinity; and whenever it
strayed to a distanee, and was alarmed at a
wild beast, it ran back thither for safety. Every
morning it sallied forth from home, and every
evening returned to the thatched shelter of the
leafy bower of Bharata.

तस्य तस्मिन्मृगे दूर-समीपपरिवर्तिनि।

आसीच्चेत: समायुक्तं न ययावन्यतो FET २२॥
विमुक्तराज्यतनय: प्रोज्झिताशेषबान्धव:।

ममत्वं स चकारोच्चैस्तस्मिन् हरिणबालके।। २३॥
चिरायमाणे निष्क्रान्ते तस्यासीदिति मानसम्।। २४॥
एषा वसुमति तस्य खुराग्रक्षत BGT

प्रीतये मम जातोऽसौ क्व ममैणकबालक:।। २५॥
विषाणाग्रेण मद्बाहुकण्डूयनपरो हि स:।
क्षेमेणाभ्यागतोऽरण्यादपि At सुखयिष्यति।। २६॥
एते लूनाशिखास्तस्य दशनैरचिरोद्गतै:।
कुश: aren विराजन्ते वटव: सामगा Sa २७॥

Whilst the deer was thus the inmate of his
hermitage,.the mind of the king was ever
anxious about the animal, now, wandering
away, and now returning to his side, and he
was unable to think of anything else. He had
relinquished his kingdom, his children, all his
friends, and now indulged in selfish affection
for a fawn. When absent for a longer time than
ordinary, he would fancy that it had been
earried off by wolves, devoured by a tiger, or
slain by a lion. “The earth,” he would exelaim,
“is embrowned by the impressions of its hoofs.
What has become of the young deer, that was
born for my delight? How happy I should be if
he had returned from the thieket, and I felt his
budding antlers rubbing against my arm.
These tufts of sacred grass, of whieh the heads
have been nibbled by his new teeth, look like
pious lads ehanting the Sama-veda.”™

sei चिरगते तस्मिन् स चक्रे मानसं मुनि:।
प्रीतिप्रसन्नवदन: पार्श्वस्थे चाभवन् मृगे।। २८॥।
समाघिभङ्ग'स्तस्यर्म्म।त् तन्ममत्वादृतात्मन:।
सन्त्यक्तराज्यभोगद्भिस्वजनस्यापि TT २९॥
चपलं चपले तस्मिन् दूरगं दूरगामिनि।
मृगपोतेऽभवच्चित्तं स्थैर्य्यवत्तस्य भूपते:।। ३०॥

Thus the Muni meditated whenever the
deer was long absent from him; and
contemplated him with a countenance
animated with pleasure as he stood by his side.
His abstraction was interrupted, the spirit of
the king being engrossed by the fawn, even
though he had abandoned farnily, wealth, and
dominion. The firmness of the prince’s mind
beeame unsteady, and wandered with the
wanderings of the young decr.

कालेन गच्छता BIST कालञ्चक्रे महीपति:।
Foret Gre पुत्रेण मृगपोतेन वीक्षित:।। ३ १॥
