३04

obvious resemblance between the Pauranik legends
of Ila and the Mosaic record; nor do the former
authorise the particulars of Ila stated by Faber, on
the authority probably of Wilford. The Manu
Satyavrata, who was preserved in the ark, is never
called Ila nor is he the father of Ila. Buddha was not
so preserved nor is Ila ever a title of Buddha.
Budha (not Buddha), the husband of Ila, never
appears as her father nor is he a Manu nor is she the
daughter of any ancient personage prescrved in an
ark. There is not therefore, as far as I am aware,
any circumstance in the history of Ila or Ila which
can identify either with Abraham or Noah.

6. The Matsya calls the name of third Haritasva;
the Vayu, Vinatasva; the Markandeya, Vinaya; and
the Bhagavata, Vimala. All but the last agree in
stating that Uktala (Orissa) and Gaya in Bihar are
named after the two first. The Matsya calls the third
the sovercign of thc east, along with the Kauravas;
the Vayu makes him king of the west. The
Bhagavata calls them all three rulers of the south.

7. The authorities agree in this location of
Sudyumna. Pratisthana was situated on the eastern
side of the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna;
the country between which rivers was the territory
of the direct male descendants of Vaivasvata. In the
Hari Varna it is said that he reigned in Pratisthana,
having killed Dhrstaka, Ambarisa and Danda :
सुहास्त्र: कारयामास प्रतिष्ठाने नृपकियां। धृष्टकश्चाम्बरीषश्च दण्डश्चेति
हतत्रय:।। M. Langlois had no doubt सुतत्रय: in his
copy, as he renders it, ‘Il donna naissance 4 trois
enfans;' though, as he observes, Hamilton and
called these the sons of Iksvaku. The Brahma
Purana has not this passage nor does the
commentator on the Hari Varhga give any
explanation; neither does any thing of the kind
occur elsewherc. We have however, subsequently
in the text, Danda named as a son of Iksvaku; and
in the Padma Purana, Sristi Khanda and in the
Uttara Khanda of the Ramayana, we have a detailed
narrative of Danda, the son of Iksvaku, whose
country was laid waste by an imprecation of
Bhargava, whose daughter that prince had violated.
His kingdom became in consequence the Dandaka
forest. The Mahabharata, Dana Dharma, alludes to
the same story. If therefore the preferable reading
of the Hari Varhsa be Siita, ‘son’, it is at variance
with all other authorities. At the same time it must
be admitted, that the same work is singular in

THE VISNU-PURANAM

asserting any collision between Danda and his
brothers and Sudyumna and the passage seems to
have grown out of that careless and ignorant
compilation which the Hari Varhsa so perpetually
presents. It is not improbably a gratuitous
perversion of this passage in the Matsya;
नाभागस्याम्बतरीषस्तु धृष्टस्यच सुतत्रयं। 'Ambarisa was the
son of Nabhaga; and Dhrsta had three sons.'

8. This story has been modified apparently at
different periods, according to a progressive horror
of the crime. Our text simply states the fact. The
Vayu says he was hungry and not only killed, but
ate the cow of his spiritual preceptor, Cyavana. In
the Markandeya he is described as being out a
hunting and killing the cow of the father of
Babhravya, mistaking it for a Gavaya or Gayal. The
Bhagavata, as usual, improves upon the story and
says that Prsadhra was appointed by his Guru Vasis
tha to protect his cattle. In the night a tiger made his
way into the fold and the prince in his haste and the
dark, killed the cow upon which he had fastened,
instead of the tiger. In all the authorities the effect
is the same and the imprecation of the offended
sage degraded Prsadhra to the caste of Sidra.
According to the Bhagavata, the prince-led a life of
devotion and perishing in the flame of a forest,
obtained final liberation. The obvious purpose of
this legend and of some that follow, is to account
for the origin of the different castes from one
common ancestor.

9. The Bhagavata also places the K4risas in the
north; उत्तरपथगोप्तार: | but the country of the Kartisas is
usually placed upon the Paripatra or Vindhya
mountains (See Bk, IJ. Ch. WI. n. 13).

10. The Vayu has Nabhaga, the son of Arista;
नाभागोरिष्टपुत्रस्तु। the Markandeya has, the son of Dista;
दिष्टपुत्रस्तनुनाभाग:। the Bhagavata also calls him the son
of Dista. According to that authority, he became a
Vaisya by his actions. The other Purdnas generally
agree that the descendants of this person became
Vaisyas; but the Matsya and Vayu do not notice it.
The Markandeya details a story of Nabhaga's
carrying off and marrying the daughter of a Vaisya;
in consequence of which he was degraded, it is
said, to the same caste and deprived of his share of
the patrimonial sovereignty, which his son and
successor recovered. The Brahma Purana and Hari
Varga assert that two sons of Nabhagarista again
became Brahmanas; but the duties of royalty imply
