BOOK I, CHAP. 15

blinded: this woman has been created by some
one to beguile me: Brahma is beyond the reach
of those agitated by the waves of infirmity.’ I
had subdued my passions, and was about to
attain divine knowledge. This was foreseen by
him by whom this girl has been sent hither. Fie
on the passion that has obstructed my
devotions. All the austerities that would have
led to acquisition of the wisdom of theVeda
have feeen rendered of no avail by passion that
is the road to hell.' The pious sage, having thus
reviled himself, turned to the nymph, who was
sitting nigh. and said to her.

गच्छ पापे यथाकामं यत् कार्यं तत्कृतं त्वया।

देवराजस्य मत्क्षोभं कुर्वन्त्या भावचेष्टितै:।।४०॥

न त्वां करोम्यहं भस्म क्रोधतीव्रेण वह्निना।

सतां साप्तपदं मैत्रमुषितोऽहं त्वया El ४१॥।

अथवा तव को दोष: किं वा कुप्याम्यहं तव।

ममैव दोषो नितरां येनाहमजितेन्द्रिय:॥४२॥

यया शक्रप्रियार्थिन्या Fat मे तपसो व्यय:।

त्वया fae त्वां महामोहमञ्जूषां सुजुगुप्सिताम्।॥४३॥

‘Go. deceitful girl. whither you will: you
have performed the office assigned you by the
monarch of the gods of disturbing my penance
by your fascinations. I will not reduce you to
ashes by the fire of my wrath. Seven paces
together is sufficient for the friendship of the
virtuous, but you and I have dwelt together.
And in truth what fault have you committed?
why should I be wroth with you? The sin is
wholly mine. in that I could not subdue my
passions; yet fie upon you, who, to gain favour
with Indra, have disturbed my devotions; vile
bundle of delusion.’

सोम उवाच
यावदित्यं स विप्ररषिस्तां व्रवीति सुमध्यमाम्।
MAS गलत्स्वेदजला सा बभूवातिवेपथु:।॥४४॥
गच्छ गच्छेति सक्रोधमुवाच मुनिसत्तम:।।४५॥
सा तु निर्भत्सिता तेन विनिष्कम्य तदाश्रमात्।
आकाशगामिनी AS ममार्ज तरुपल्लवै:॥४६॥

95

वृक्षाद् gat wal बाला तदग्रारुणपल्लवै।
निर्मार्जमाना गात्राणि गलत्स्वेदजलानि वै।। vio
ॠषिणा यस्तदा गर्भस्तस्या देहे समाहित:।
निर्जगाम स रोमाच्च स्वेदरूपी तदङ्गत:।।४८॥

Thus spoken to by the Muni. Pramlocha
stood trembling, whilst big drops of
perspiration started from every pore; till he
angrily cried to her, ‘Depart, begone.' She
then. reproached by him, went forth from his
dwelling, and, passing through the air. wiped
the perspiration from her person with the
leaves of the trees. The nymph went from tree
to tree, and as with the dusky shoots that
crowned their summits she dried her limbs,
which were covered with moisture, the child
she had conceived by the Rsi came forth from
the pores of her skin in drops of perspiration.

तं aan जगृहुर्गर्भमेकं चक्रे तु मारुत:।

मया चाप्यायितो गोभि: स det वव्रधे शनै:॥४९॥
वृक्षाप्रगर्भसम्भूता मारिषाख्या वरानना।

at प्रदास्यन्ति वो वृक्षा: कोप एष प्रशाम्यताम्।॥५०॥
कण्डोरपत्यमेवं सा वृक्षेभ्यश्च समुद्गता।
ममापत्यं तथा वायो: प्रम्लोचातनया च सा।५१॥

The trees received the living dews, and the
winds collected them into one mass. “This,”
said Soma. “J matured by my rays, and
gradually it increased in size. till the
exhalation, that had rested on the tree tops
became the lovely girl named Méarisé. The
trees will her to you, Pracetasas: let your
indignation be appeased. She is the progeny of
Kandu, the child of Pramlocha the nursling of
the trees, the daughter of the wind and of the
moon.

`स चापि भगवान् कण्डु: after तपसि सत्तम:।
पुरुषोत्तमाख्यं मैत्रेय विष्णोरायतनं ययौ।। ५२॥
तत्रैकाग्रमतिर्भूत्वा चकाराराधनं हरे:।
ब्रह्मपारमयं कुर्वन् जपमेकाग्रमानस:।
ऊर्ध्वबाहुर्महायोगी स्थित्वासौ भूपनन्दना।। ५३॥

The holy Kandu after the interruption of his
pious exercises, went, excellent princes, to the
