340

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Puriravas had six sons, Ayus, Dhimat,
Amavasu, Visvavasu, Satayus and Srutayus.'
The son of Amavasu was Bhima;” his son was
Kancana;> his son was Suhotra;* whose son
was Jahnu. This prince, while performing a
sacrifice, saw the whole of the place
overflowed by the waters of the Ganges.
Highly offended at this intrusion, his eyes red
with anger, he united the spirit of sacrifice
with himself, by the power of his devotion and
drank .up the river. The gods and sages upon
this came to him and appeased his indignation
and -re-obtained Ganga from him, in the
capacity of his daughter (when she is called
Jahnavi)’.

Was सुजह्रुर्नाम पुत्रोऽभवत्। तस्याप्यजक:, ad
बलाकाश्व:)। तस्मात् कुश:, कुशस्य कुशाश्व-
कुशनाभामूर्त्तरयामावसवश्चत्वार: FAT TYTN ३॥

तेषां कुशाश्व: ``शक्रतुल्यो मे पुत्रो भवे``दिति तपश्चचार।
तञ्चोग्रतपसमवलोक्य मा भवत्वन्योऽस्मत्तुल्यवीर्य्य``
इत्यात्मनैरास्येन्द्र: पुत्रत्वमगच्छत्॥४॥

The son of Jahnu was Sumantu;* his son
was Ajaka; his son was Valakasva;’ his son
was Kusa,® who had four sons, Kusamba,
Kusanaébha, Amirttaya and Amavasu.’
Kusamba, being desirous of a son, engaged in
devout penance to obtain one who should be
equal to Indra. Observing the intensity of his
devotion, Indra was alarmed lest a prince of
power like his own should be engendered and
determined therefore to take upon himself the
character of Kugamba's son.’”

गाधिर्नाम स कौशिकोऽभवत्। गाधिश्च सत्यवतीं नाम
कन्यामजनयत्। ताञ्ज भार्गव ऋचीको वव्रे॥ ५॥

गाधिरप्यतिरोषणाय sf च ब्राह्मणाय.

सहस्रं कन्याशुल्कमयाचत।। ६॥
तेनापि efron वरुणसकाशादुपलभ्य अश्चतीर्थोत्पन्नं

तादृशाश्वसहस्रं दत्तम्॥७॥ |

ततस्तामृचीक: कन्यामुपयेमे।

He was accordingly born as Gadhi, of the
race of Kusa (Kausika). Gadhi had a daughter

named Satyavati. Rcika, of the descendants of
Bhrgu, demanded her in marriage. The king
was very unwilling to give his daughter to a
peevish old Brahmana and demanded of him,
as the nuptial present, a thousand fleet horses,
whose colour should be white, with one black
ear. Rcika having propitiated Varuna, the god
of ocean, obtained from him, at the only
placed called ASvatirtha, a thousand such
steeds; and giving them to the king, espoused
his daughter.''

ऋचीकश्च तस्याश्चरुमपत्यार्थं चकार। तथा प्रसादितश्च
तन्मात्रे क्षत्रवरपुत्रोत्पत्तये चरुमपरं साधयामास।। ८॥

एष चरुर्भवत्या अयमपरस्त्वन्मात्रा सम्यगुपयोज्य
इत्युक्त्वा वनं जगाम।९॥

उपयोगकाले च at माता सत्यवतीमाह-सर्व
एवात्मपुत्रमतिगुणं समभिलषति, नात्मजायाभ्रातृगुणेष्व-
त्तीवादृतो भवतीत्यतोऽर्हसि मम त्वमात्मीयञ्चरुं ag
मदीयञ्चरूमात्मनोपयोक्तुम्।। १०॥

भत्पुत्रेण fe सकलभूमण्डलपरिपालनं कार्यम्॥ ११॥

कियद्ब्राह्मणस्य बलवीर्यसम्पदित्युक्ता सा स्वं चरुं मात्रे
दत्तवती॥ १२॥

In order to effect the birth of a son, Rictka’?
prepared a dish of rice, barley and pulse, with
butter and milk, for his wife to eat; and at her
request he consecrated a similar mixture for
her mother, by partaking of which she should
give birth to a prince of martial prowess.

Leaving both dishes with his wife, after
describing particularly which was intended for
her and which for hes mother, the sage went
forth to the forests. When the time arrived for
the food to be eaten, the queen said to

_Satyavati, "Daughter, all persons wish their
children to be possessed of excellent qualities
and would be mortified to see them surpassed
by the merits of their mother's brother. It will
be desirable for you, therefore, to give me the
mess your husband has set apart for you and to
eat of that intended for me; for the son which
it is to procure me is destined to be the
monarch of the whole world, while that which
your dish would give you must be a
