540

THE VISNU-PURANAM

जनलोकगतै: fag: सनकाद्यैरभिष्टुत:।
ब्रह्मलोकगतैश्चैव चिन्त्यमानो मुमुक्षुभि:।।५॥
& दिव्यां योगिनिद्रां समास्थित:।
आत्मानं वासुदेवाख्यं चिन्तयन् परमेश्वर:।। ६॥
we नैमित्तिको नाम मैत्रेय! प्रतिसञ्जर:।
निमित्तं तत्र यच्छेते ब्रह्मरूपधरो हरि:॥७॥

The creator, Hari, sleeps upon the ocean, in
the form of Brahma- glorified by Sanaka and
the saints who had gone to the Janaloka, and
contemplated by the holy inhabitants of
Brahmaloka, anxious for final liberation-
involved in mystic slumber, the celestial
personification of his own illusions, and
meditating on his own ineffable spirit, which
is called Vasudeva. This, Maitreya, is the
dissolution termed incidental, because Hari, in
the form of Brahma, sleep there, as its
incidental cause.

यदा जागर्ति विश्वात्मा स तदा चेष्टते जगत्।
निमीलत्येतदखिलं योगशय्याशयेऽच्युते॥ ८।।
पद्मयोनेदिनं यत्तु चतुर्युगसहस्रवत्।
एकार्णवाप्लुते लोके तावती रात्रिरिष्यते।। ९॥
ब्रह्मस्वरूपधृग् विष्णुर्यथा ते कथितं Fa १०॥

When the universal spirit wakes, the world
revives; when he closes his eyes, all things fall
upon the bed of mystic slumber. In like
manner as a thousand great ages constitute a
day of Brahma, so his night consists of the
same period; during which the world is
submerged by a vast ocean. Awaking at the
end of his night, the unborn, Visnu, in the
character of Brahma, creates the universe
anew, in the manner formerly related to you'.

इत्येष कल्पसंहारश्चान्तर: प्रलयो द्विज।
नैमित्तिकस्ते कथित: प्राकृत: Yat: षपरम्॥ ११॥
अनावृष्ट्याग्निसम्पर्कात् कृते संक्षालने मुने।
समस्तेष्वेव लोकेषु पातालेष्वखिलेषु an १२॥
महदादेविकारस्य विशेषान्तस्य संक्षये।
कृष्णेच्छाकारिते तस्मिन् प्रवृत्ते प्रतिसञ्चरे।। १३॥

I have thus described to you the
intermediate dissolution of the world,
occurring at the end of every Kalpa. I will
now, Maitreya, describe to you elemental
dissolution. When by dearth and fire all the
worlds and Patadlas are withered up and the
modifications of Mahat and other products of
nature are by all the will of Krsna destroyed,
the progress of elemental dissolution is begun.

आपो ग्रसन्ति वै पूर्वं भूमेर्गन्धात्मकं गुणम्।
आन्तगन्धा ततो AP: प्रलयत्वाय कल्पते।। १४॥
प्रनष्टे गन्धतन्मात्रेऽभवत् पृथ्वी जलात्मिका।
रसाज्जलं समुद्रभूतं तस्माज्जातं रसात्मकम्।। १५॥
आपस्तदा प्रवृद्धास्तु वेगवत्यो महास्वना:।
सर्वमापूरयन्तीदं तिष्ठन्ति विचरन्ति च।
सलिलेनैवोम्मिमता लोका व्याप्ता: WATT १६३
अपामपि गुणो यस्तु ज्योतिषा पीयते तु स:।
नश्यन्त्यापस्ततस्ताश्च रसतन्मात्रसंक्षयात् ॥ १७॥
ततश्चापो हृतरसा ज्योतिष्टंव प्रापुवन्ति वै।
अग्न्यवस्थे तु सलिले तेजसा सर्वतो वृते।। १८॥
स चाग्नि: सर्वतो व्याप्त आदत्ते त्लं तदा।
सर्वमापूर्य्य तेजोभिस्तदा जगदिदं शनै:।। १९॥
अर्चिरभि: dae तस्मिन् तिर्य्यगूदर्ध्वमधस्तथा।
ज्योतिषोऽपि परं रूपं वायुरत्ति प्रभाकरम्॥ २०॥
weit च ततस्तस्मिन् वायुभूतेऽखिलात्मनि।

Then, first, the waters swallow up the
property of earth, which is the rudiment of
smell; and earth, deprived of its property,
proceeds to destruction. Devoid of the
rudiment of odour, the earth becomes one with
water. The waters then being much
augmented, roaring, and rushing along, fill up
all space, whether agitated or still. When the
universe is thus pervaded by the waves of the
watery element, its rudimental flavour is
licked up by the element of fire, and, in
consequence of the destruction of their
rudiments, the waters themselves are
destroyed. Deprived of the essential rudiment
of flavour, they become one with fire, and the
universe is therefore entirely filled with flame,
which drinks up the water on every side, and
