164

THE VISNU-PURANAM

which Ayodhya was the capital. Ramayana, I. s. 5.
In the Mahabharata we have one Kofas in the east
and another in the south, besides the Prak-kosalas
and Uttara-Kosgalas in the east and north. The
Puranas place the Kosalas amongst the people ‘on
the back of Vindhya;' and it would appear from the
Vayu that Kusa, the son of Rama, transferred his
kingdom to a more central position; be ruled over
Kosala at his capital of Kusasthali or Kusavati, built
upon the Vindhyan: precipices ; i the
same is alluded to in the Patéla Khanda of the
Padma Purana, and in the Raghu Varhéa, for the
purpose of explaining the return of Kusa to
Ayodhya. Certainly in later times the country of
Kosala lay south of Qude, for in the Ratnavali the
general of Vatsa surrounds the king of Kosala in
the Vindhya mountains: (Hindu Theatre, II.305)
and as noticed in the same work, (p. 267) we have
in thePurdnas, Sapta Kosalas, or seven Kosalis. An
inscription found at Ratnapur in Chattisgarh,, of
which I have an unpublished translation, states that
Sri-deva, the governor of Malahari Mandala,
having obtained the favour of Prithvideva, king of
Kosala was enabled to build temples, and dig tanks,
&c., indicating the extension of the power of
Kosala across the Gnges in that direction. The
inscription is dated Samvat 915, or A.D. 858. The
Kosala of the Purinas and of the dramatic and
poetic writers was however more to the west, along
a part of the Vindhya range. Ptolemy has a
Kontakossula in the south, probably one of he
Kosalas of the Hindus.

80. Also Itikas; perhaps the Isikas or Aisikas of
the Vayu. &c. a people of the south.

81. The people of Kashmir.

82. One of the chief tribes engaged in the war of
the Mahabharata. The Ramayana places them in the
west; the Puranas in the north. The term Sindhu
shows their position to have been upon the Indus,
apparently in the Punjab.

83. These are also a people of the north-west,
found both on the west of the Indus and in the
Punjab, and well known to classical authors as the
Gandharii and Gandaridae. As. Res, XV. 103; also
Journal of the R. As. Soc.; Account of the Foe-ktie-
ki.

84. From the context this should probably be
Darvakas, the people of a district usually specified
in connexion with the succeeding. `

85. These are the inhabitants of the country
bordering on Kashmir, to the south and west;
known to the Greeks as the kingdom of Abisaras. It
often occurs in composition with Darva,’ as
Darvabhisara. As. Res, XV. 24.

86. Also read Uliitas and Kulitas: the Ramayana
has Kolikas or Kauldtas amongst the western
tribes.

87. Also with the short vowel, Saivalas.

88. The V4hlikas or Babhikas are always
associated with the people of the north, west, and
ultra-Indian provinces, and are usually considered
to represent the Bactrians, or people of Balkh. It is
specified in the Mahabh. Udyoga P. as famous for
its horses, a reputation the country bordering upon
it. at least Bokhara and Maimena, still preserves:
and in Arjuna's Dig-vijaya it is said to be difficult
of approach.

89. These are probably intended for the
neighbours of the Abhisdsras: they are found in the
north by Arjuna. Dig-vijaya. and are there termed
also Ksatriyas.

90. Also read Bahabadhya and Bahurada.

9]. The name occurs in the Ramayana as that of
a mountain in the Punjab or in the Bahika country.
II. 53.

92. The MSS. agree in reading this Vanayava or
Vanayus, a people in the north-west, also’ famous
for horses.

93. A better reading is Dasaparsva, as we have
had Dasarnas before. 94 Also Ropanas:
qucrc, Romans?

95. Also Gachchas and Kachchas: the last is the
best reading, although it has occurred ‘before.

96. Also Gopdla-kachchas: they are amongst the
eastern tribes in Bhima's Dig-vijaya.

97. Or Langalas.

98. Kurujangalas, or the people of the forests in
the upper part of the Doab: it is also read
Paravallabhas.

99. The analogy to ‘barbarians’ is not in sound
only, but in all the authorities these are classed with
borderers and foreigners and nations not Hindu.

100. Also Dahas, in which we should have a
resemblance to the Scythian Dahae.

101. Or Tamaliptas or Damaliptas: the people at
the western mouth of the Ganga in Medinipur and
Tamluk. Tamralipli was a celebrated sea-port in the
