BOOK I, CHAP. 4

25

universe is of the nature of wisdom, and Judge
of it as an object of perception only, are lost in
the ocean of spiritual ignorance. But they who
know true wisdom, and whose minds are pute,
behold this whole world as one with divine
knowledge, as one with you, oh god. Be
favorable, oh universal spirit: raise up this
earth, for the habitation of created beings.
Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are like lotuses,
give us felicity.

सत्त्वोद्रिक्तोऽसि भगवन् गोविन्द पृथिवीमिमाम्।

समुद्धर भवायेश शं नो देह्यन्जलोचन।॥ ४३॥

सर्गप्रवृत्तिर्भवतो जगतामुपकारिणी।

भवत्वेषा नमस्तेऽस्तु शं नो तेह्यब्जलोचन।।४४॥

Oh lord, you are endowed with the quality
of goodness : raise up, Govinda, this earth, for
the general good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-
eyed. May this, your activity in creation, be
beneficial to the earth. Salutation to you. Grant
us happiness, oh lotus-eyed.
पराशर उवाच `

एवं संस्तूयमानोऽथ परमात्मा महीधर:।

उज्जहार क्षितिं fare न्यस्तवांश्च महार्णवे।। ४५॥
तस्योपरि समुद्रस्य महती नौरिव स्थिता।
विततत्वाच्च देहस्य न मही याति संप्लवम्।।४६॥
awa: क्षितिं wat कृत्वा पृथिव्यां सोऽपि नोद्गिरीन्।
यथा विभागं भगवाननादि: परमेश्वर:।। ४७॥

wee सर्गदग्धानखिलान् wary पृथिवीतले।
अमोघेन प्रभावेण ससर्जामोघवांछित:॥ ४ ८॥

Parasara said— The supreme being thus
eulogised, upholding the earth, raised it
quickly, and placed it on the summit of the
ocean, where it floats like a mighty vessel, and
from its expansive surface does not sink
beneath the waters. Then, having levelled the
earth, the great eternal deity divided it into
portions, by mountains: he who never wills in
vain, created, by his irresistible power, those

mountains gain upon the earth which had been
consumed at the destruction of the world.

भूविभागं तत: कृत्वा सप्तद्वीपं यथातथम्।

भुवाद्यांश्चतुरो लोकान् पूर्ववत् सतकल्पयत्॥४९॥

ब्रह्मरूपधरो देवस्तत्तोऽसौ GAT BA:

wan सृष्टिं भगवांश्चतुर्वक्त्रधरो हरि:॥५०॥

निमित्तमात्रमेवासीत् सृज्यानां सर्गकर्म्मणि।

प्रधानकारणीभूता यतो वै सृज्यशक्तय:।। ५ १॥

निमित्रमात्रं मुक्त्वाकं नान्यत् किंचिदवेक्षते।

नीयते तपतां श्रेष्ठ स्वशक्त्या वस्तुवस्तुताम्।। ६ २॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे चतुर्थोध्याय:।

Having then divided the earth into seven
great portions cr continents, as it was before,
he constructed in like manner the four (lower)
spheres, earth, sky, heaven, and the spherc of
the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari, the four-
faccd god, invested with the quality of
activity, and taking the form of Brahma,
accomplished the creation: but he (Brahma) is
only the instrumental cause of things to be
created; the things that are capable of being
created arise from nature as a common
material cause: with the exception of one
instrumental cause alone, therc is no need of
any other cause, for (imperceptible) substance
becomes perceptible substance according to
the powers with which it is originally imbued."

tek
NOTES

1. This creation is of the secondary order, or
Pratisarga; water, and even the earth, being in
existence, and consequently having been preceded
by the creation of Mahat and the elements. It is also
a different Pratisarga from that described by Manu.
in which Svayambhu first creates the waters, then
the egg : one of the simplest forms, and perhaps
therefore one of the earliest in which the tradition
occurs.

2. This is the well known verse of Manu. I. 8,
rendered by Jones. “The waters are called Nara.
because they were the production of Nara. or ‘the
spirit’ of God; and since they were his first Ayana.
or place of motion, he thence is named Narayana,
or 'moving on the waters.” Now although there can
be little doubt that this tradition is in substance the
same as that of Genesis, the language of the
translation is perhaps more scriptural than is quite
