BOOK VI, CHAP. 6

549

infinite, god in individuals and universals,
visible and invisible, omnipotent, omnipresent,
omniscient, almighty. The wisdom, perfect,
pure, supreme, undefiled, and one only, by
which he is conceived contemplated, and
known, that is wisdom; all else is ignorance.”

NOTES

1. The three kinds of affliction, inseparable,
incidental and superhuman, are fully described in
the commentary on the first verse of the Sankhya
Karika in a similar strain as that which is adopted in
the text.

2. Some further particulars of the different hells,
and the punishments inflicted in them, have been
given before : see Bk, I. Ch. XIV.

3. All this is conformable to the Samkhya
doctrines in particular, although the same spirit
pervades all Hindu metaphysics.

4. Tasmat Tat praptaye yatna kartavya
panditairnaraih (तस्मात् at: | HUA:

:). The expression Tat Praptaye, ‘for the
obtaining of that,’ refers to the phrase immediately
preceding, Bhagavatprapti, ‘obtaining of,’ or
‘attaining to, Bhagavat,” the lord.

5. Brahma is of two kinds; Sabda~Brahma, spirit
or god to be attained through the word, that is, the
Vedas and the duties they prescribe; and Para-
Brahma, spirit or god to be attained through
reflection, by which the difference between soul
and matter is ascertained.

6. This seems intended as a quotation from
Manu, but it has not been found in the code; it is 3
ब्रह्माणि वेदितव्ये शब्दब्रह्म परचं aq शब्द ब्रह्मणि निष्णात: Ww
ब्रह्माधिगच्छति।

7. The commentator quotes other passages from
the Vedas of a similar tendency, intimating,
however, the necessity of performing acts prior to
attaining knowledge; as, कषाये BAH: पक्वे ततो ज्ञानं
तु परमागति:। ‘The decoction (preparatory process)
being digested by rites, thereafter knowledge is the
supreme resource.’ अविद्ययामृत्युं deat विद्ययामृतमश्नुते।
‘Having crossed the gulf of death by ignorance
(ceremonial acts}, man obtains immortality by
(holy) knowledge.’

8. According to the comment, allusion is here
made to the twelve syllable Mantra, or mystic for
mula addressed to Visnu: “Om  Bhagavate
Vasudevaya namah; ‘Om! salutation to Bhagavat

Vasudeva.’ the repetition: of which, by those
devoted (bhakta) to Visnu, is the easy mode of
securing their liberation.” The mysticism is,
however, no doubt older than the worship of Visnu;
and the term Bhagavat is defined in the text
according to the interpretation of the Vedas.

9. The commentator says: these interpretations
are from the Nirukta, the glossary of the Vedas.
The more etymological derivation of the term is,
Bhaga, ‘power,’ ‘authority’, and vat possessive
affix.

10. From the root Vas (@€),
‘dwelling.’ See Bk. I. Chs, I and II.

RK

‘abiding,’
