BOOK V, CHAP. 34

507

areal: स पौण्ड्रको गत्वा त्वया ea! वचो मम।
ज्ञातस्त्वद्वाक्यसद्भावो यत् कार्य तद्विधीयताम्।। ९॥
गृहीतचिह्न एवाहमागमिष्यामि ते पुरम्।
समुत्स्रक्ष्यामि ते ah निजचिह्नमसंशयम्। १०॥
आज्ञापूर्वञ्च यदिदमागच्छेति त्वयोदितम्।
सम्पादियष्ये श्वस्तुभ्यं तदप्येषोऽविलम्बितम्॥ ११।
शरणं ते सम्भ्येत्यं Haley नृपते! तदा।

यथा त्वत्त्वो भयं भूयो न मे किञ्चिद्भविष्यति।। १२॥
गरुत्मन्तमथारुह्य त्वरितं तत्पुरं ययो ॥ १३॥

There was a Vdsudeva who was called
Paundraka’, and who. Though not the
Vasudeva was flattered by ignorant people as
the descended deity, until he fancied himself

to be the Vasudeva” who had come down upon
earth. Losing all recollection of his real

character, he assumed the emblems of Visnu,.

and sent an ambassador to the magnanimous
Krsna with this message; “Relinquish, you
foolish fellow, the discus; lay aside all my
insignia, my name, and the character of
Vasudeva; and come and do me homage ; and
I will vouchsafe you means of subsistence.” At
which Janarddana laughed, and replied, “Go
messenger, back to Paundraka, and say to him
from me, 'T will dispatch to you my emblem
the discus without fail. You will nghtly
apprehend my meaning, and consider what is
to be done, for I shall come to thy city,
bringing the discus with me, and _ shall
undoubtedy consign it to you. If you will
command me to come, I will immediately
obey, and be with you tomorrow; there shall
be no delay: and, having sought thy asylum, I
will so provide, O king that I shall never more
have any thing to dread from you." So saying,
he dismissed the ambassador to report these
words to his sovereign; and summoning
Garuda, mounted him, and set off for the city
of Paundraka’.

स चापि केशवोद्योगं sear काशिपतिस्तदा।
सर्वसैन्यपरीवार: पाष्णिग्राह उपाययौ।। १४॥

ततो बलेन महता काशिराजबलेन च।

पौण्ड्रको वासुदेवोऽसौ केशवाभिमुखं Tatu १५॥

तं ददर्श हरिर्दूरादुदारस्यन्दने स्थितम्।

चक्रहस्तं रादाखड्गबाहुं पाणिगताम्बुजम्।। १६॥

स्रग्धरं धृताशार्ङ्गञ्च सुपर्णरचितध्वजम्।

वक्ष:स्थले कृतञ्चास्य श्रीवत्सं ददृशे हरि:॥ १७॥

किरीटकुण्डलधरं पीतवास:समन्वितम्।

FEAT तं भावगम्भीरं जहास गरूडध्वज: ॥ १८॥

युयुधे च बलेनास्य हस्त्यश्वबलिना द्विज।

निस्निंशष्टिंगदाशूलशक्तिकार्म्मकशालिना।। १९॥

क्षणेन mishap: शरैरिषुविदारणै:।

गदाघक्रमिपातैश्च सूदयामास तद्बलम् ॥ Voll

उवाच पौण्ड्रकं मूढ्मात्मचिह्नोपलक्षणम्।। २१॥

When the king of Kasi heard of the
preparations of KeSava, he sent his army (to
the aid of Paundraka), himself bringing up the
rear; and with the force of the king of Kasi,
and his own troops, Paundraka, the false
Vasudeva, marched to meet Krsna. Hari
beheld him afar off, standing in his car,
holding a discus, a club, a mace, a scimitar,
and a lotus, in his hands; ornamented with a
garland of flowers ; beating a bow; and having
his standard made of gold: he had also the
Srivatsa mark delineated on his breast; he was
dressed to yellow garments, and decorated
with earrings and a tiara. When the god whose
standard is Garuda beheld him, he laughed
with a deep laugh, and engaged in conflict
with the hostile host of cavalry and elephants,
fighting with swords, scimitars, maces,
tridents, spears, and bows. Showering upon the
enemy the shafts from his Sarafiga bow, and
hurling at them his mace and discus, he
quickly destroyed both the army of Paundraka
and that of the king of Kasi.

श्रोभगवानुवाच
पौण्ड्रकोक्तं त्वया यत्तु दूतवक्त्रेण मां प्रति।
समुत्सृजेति चिह्नानि तत्ते सम्पादयाम्यहम्॥ २ २॥
