BOOK IV, 24

409

passage somewhat differently : the original is,

तैश्चविमिश्रा राजा

Rosser adn: wet: क्षपयिष्यन्ति। The
comment explains शुष्मिणा: ‘strong’ (वलिन:), and adds,
‘the Mlecchas will be in the centre and the Aryyas

at the end! म्लेच्छा मध्ये sealed इत्येतदूपेण वर्त्तमाना:। वर्षसहस्रं

meaning, if any thing, that the unbelievers are in
the heart of the country and the Hindus on the
borders : a description, however, never correct,
except as applicable to the governments; and in that
case inconsistent with the text, which had
previously represented the bordering countries in
the hands of outcastes and heretics. All that the text
intends, is to represent infidels and foreigners high
in power and the Brahmanas depressed. It is not
unlikely that the reading is erroneous,
notwithstanding the copies concur and that the
passage should be here the same as that of the
Vayu; श्रा जनपदा श्चसर्व्वश: विपर्ययेण वर्त्तन्ते
नाशयिष्यन्ति वै प्रजा:। ‘Intermixed with them, the
nations, adopting everywhere barbaric institutions,
exist in a state of disorder and the subjects shall be
destroyed.’ The expression Mlecchacarasca being
used instead of Mlecchascarydsca. A passage
similar to that of the text, noticing the intermixture
of Hindus and Barbarians, occurs in a different
place (see Bk.II. Ch. III. n. 4) and designates the
conditions of India in all ages : at no period has the
whole of the population followed Brahmanical
Hinduism.

77, That is, there will be no Tirthas, places held
sacred and objects of pilgrimage; no particular spot
of earth will have any cspecial sanctity.

78. Gifts will be made from the impulse of
ordinary feeling, not in connection with religious
rites and as an act of devotion; and ablution will be
performed for pleasure or comfort, not religiously
with prescribed ceremonies and prayers.

79. The expression Sadvesadharian (सद्वेषधारिन्) is
explained to mean either one who wears fine
clothes or who assumes the exterior garb of
sanctity. Either interpretation is equally allowable.

80. The Bhagavata agrees with the text in these
particulars. The chief star of Tisya is in the
constellation Cancer.

81. All the copies concur in this reading;
यावत्परीक्षिततो WH याक्न्नन्दाभिषेचनं। एतद्वर्षसहस्रं तु
पंचदशोत्तरं॥ Three copies of the Vayu assign to the
same interval 1050 years : पंचाशदुत्तरं। and of the

Matsya five copies have the same, पंचाशदुत्तरं। or
1050 years; while one copy has 1500 years;

पंचशतोत्तरं। The Bhagavata has 1115 years; एतट्टर्षसहस्रं
तु शतं पंचदशोत्तरं। which the commentator explains, a
thousand years and a hundred with fifteen over;’

पंचदशोत्तरं wi च। He notices nevertheless,

although he doesn't attempt to account for the
discrepancy, that the total period from Pariksgit to
Nanda was actually, according to the duration of
the different intermediate dynasties, as enumerated
by all the authorities, fifteen centuries; viz.
Magadha kings . . . 1000 years, Pradyota etc . . .138
years. SiSunaga. . . 362. Total 1500 years. The
shorter period is best proportioned to the number of
kings; for reckoning from Sahadeva, who was
contemporary with Pariksit and taking the number
of the Varhadrathas from the Matsya, we have
thirty-two of them, five of the Pradyota race and
ten Saiguragas or in all forty-seven; which, as the
divisor of 1050, gives rather more twenty-two years
to a reign. The Vayu an the Matsya further specify
the interval from Nanda to Pulomat, that last of the
Andhra kings, as being 836 years; a total that does
not agree exactly with the items previously
specified : 9 Nandas. . .100 years, 10 Mauryas. .

137, 10 Suagas. . .112, 4 Kanvas. . .45. 29
Andhras. . .460. Total 62 kings, 854 years. In either
case the average duration of reign is not

improbable, as the highest number gives less than
fourteen years to each prince. It is important to
remember that the reign of Pariksit is, according to
Hindu chronology, coeval with the commencement
of the Kali age; and even therefore taking the
longest Pauranik interval we have but sixteen
centuries between Candragupta—or considering him
as the same with Sandrocoptos, nineteen centuries
B.C.—for the beginning of the Kali age. According
to the chronology of our text, however, it would be
but B.C. 1415; to that of the Vayu and Matsya,
B.C. 1450; and to that of the Bhagavata, 1515.
According to Wilford's computations (As. Res. Vol.
IX. Chron. Table, p. 116) the conclusion of the
great war took place B.C. 1370; Buchanan
conjectures it to have occurred in the thirteenth
century B.C. Vyasa was the putative father of
Pandu and Dhrtarastra and consequently was

wa contemporary with the heroes of the great war.

Colebrooke infers from astronomical date that
arrangement of the Vedas attributed to Vyasa took
