BOOK VI, CHAP. 8

567

मुक्ति चेतसि a: स्थितोऽमलधियां पुंसा ददात्यव्यय:,

fa चित्रं यदघं प्रग्राति विलयं तत्राच्युते कीर्तिते॥ ५५॥

The man who fixes his mind of Visnu goes
not to hell: he who meditates upon him regards
heavenly enjoyment only as an impediment:
and he whose mind and soul are penetrated by
him thinks little of the world of Brahma; for
when present in the minds of those whose
intellects are free from soil, he confers upon
them eternal freedom. What marvel therefore
is it that the sins of one who repeats the name
of Achyuta should be wiped away?
यं यं ब्रह्ममयं परापरमयं ध्यायन्ति च ज्ञानिन:।
यञ्च प्राप्य न जायते न म्रियते नो age daa,
नैवासन्न च सद्भवत्यति aa: fae वा हरे: STATIN ५६॥
कव्यं a: पितृरूपधृग् विधिहुतं हव्यञ्च भुङक्ते प्रभु।
fara भगवाननादिनिधन: स्वाहास्वधासंज्ञितम्।
afer ब्रह्मणि सर्वशक्तिनिलये मानानि नो मानिनाम्,
Fort प्रभवन्ति हन्ति कलुषं श्रोत्रं स यातो हरि: ॥५७॥

Should not that Hari be heard of, whom
thase devoted to acts worship with sacrifices
continually as god of sacrifice; whom those
devoted to meditation contemplate as primary
and secondary, composed of spirit; by
obtaining whom man is not born, nor
nourished, nor subjected to death ; who is all
that is, and that is not (or both cause and
effect); who, as the progenitors, receives the
libations made to them; who as the gods,
accepts the offerings addressed to them; the
glorious being who is without beginning or
end; whose name is both Svaha and Svadha’;
who is the abode of all spiritual power; in
whom the limits of finite things cannot be
measured"; and who, when he enters the ear,
destroys all sin? who is substance that knows
not change.

नान्तोऽस्ति यस्य न च यस्य समुद्भवोऽस्ति
वृद्धिर्न यस्य परिणामविवर्जितस्य।
नापक्षयञ्च समुपैत्यविकल्पवस्तु,
यस्तं नतोऽस्मि पुरुषोत्तममाद्यमीशम्॥ ५ ८॥

I adore that ever inexhaustible spirit, who
assumed sensible qualities; who, though one,
became many; who, though pure, became as if
impure, by appearing in many and various
shapes; who is endowed with divine wisdom,
and is the author of the preservation of all
creatures.

तस्यैव योऽनुगुणभुग् बहुघैक एव,

शुद्धोऽप्यशुद्ध sa मूर्तिविभागभेदै:।
ज्ञानान्वित: सकलसत्त्वविभूतिकर्त्त
तस्मै नतोऽस्मि पुरुषाय सदाव्ययाय।। ५९॥

I adore him, who is the one conjoined
essence and object of both meditative wisdom
and active virtue; who is watchful in providing
for human enjoyments; who is one with the
three qualities; who, without undergoing
change, is the cause of the evolution of the
world; who exists of his own essence, ever
exempt from decay.

ज्ञानप्रवृत्तिनियमैक्यमयाय पुंसो
भोगप्रदानपटवे त्रिगुणात्मकाय।

अव्याकृताय भवभावनकारणाय वन्दे
स्वरूपमभवाय सदाजराय।। ६ ०॥

शब्दादिभोगविषययोपनयक्षमाय।
पुंस: समस्तकरणैरुपकारकाय
व्यक्ताय सूक्ष्मविमलाय सदा नतोऽस्मि।। ६ १
I constantly adore him, who is entitled
heaven, air, fire, water, earth, and ether; who
is the bestower of all the objects which give
gratification to the senses; who benefits
mankind with the instruments of fruition; who
is perceptible, who 15 subtile, who is
imperceptible.
इति विविधमजस्य यस्य रूपं
प्रक्रृतिपरात्ममयं सनातनस्य।
हरिरपजन्मजरादिकां स सिद्धिम्।। ६ २॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे षष्ठांशे अष्टम: अध्याय:॥
