440

THE VISNU-PURANAM

who have come to know the unreality of the
world.

उत्सृज्य जलसर्वस्य निर्मला: सितमूर्त्तय:।
तत्यजुश्चाम्बरं ter गृहं विज्ञानिनो यथा॥४॥
शरत् सूर्यांशुतप्तानि ययु: शोषं संरासि च।
बह्वालम्बि ममत्वेन हृदयानीव देहिनाम्॥५॥
अवबोघैर्मनांसीव सम्ब्धममलात्मनाम्।। ६॥
तारका विमले व्योम्नि रराजाखण्डमण्डल:।
चन्द्रश्चरमदेहात्मा योगी साधुकुले यथा।।७॥

The clouds, of shining whiteness,
exhausted of their watery wealth, deserted the
atmosphere, like those who have acquired
wisdom and depart from their homes.
Evaporated by the rays of the autumnal sun,
the lakes were dried up, like the hearts of men
when withered by the contact of selfishness
The pellucid waters of the season were
suitably embellished by white water-lilies, as
are the minds of the pure by the apprehension
of truth. Brightly in the starry sky shone the
moon with undiminished orb, like the saintly
being, who has reached the last stage of bodily
existence in the company of the pious.

शनकै: शनकैस्तीरं तत्यजुश्च जलाशया:।
wad क्षेत्रपुत्रादिरूढमुच्चैर्यथा Fasc
पूर्वत्यक्तै: सरोऽस्भोर्हसा योगं पुनर्ययु:।

क्लेशै: कुयोगिनोऽशेषैरन्तरायहता FANS Ut
निभृतोऽभवदत्यर्थं समुद्र: स्तिमितोदक:।
क्रमावाप्त-महायोगी निश्चलात्मा यथा यति।। १०॥
सर्वत्रातिप्रसन्नानि सलिलानि तदाभवन्।

ad सर्वगते विष्णौ मनांसीव सुमेधसाम्॥ Vail

The rivers and lakes slowly retired from
their banks, as the wise by degrees shrink from
the selfish attachment that connects them with
wife and child. First abandoned by the waters
of the lake, the swans again began to
congregate, like false ascetics, whose
devotions are interrupted and they are again
assailed by innumerable afflictions. The ocean
was still and calm and _ exhibited no
undulations, like the perfect sage, who has

completed his course of restraint and has
acquired undisturbed tranquillity of spirit.
Everywhere the waters were as clear and pure
as the minds of the wise, who behold Visnu in
all things.

योगाग्निग्धक्लेशौघं योगिनामिव मानसम्॥ १२॥

अहङ्कारोद्भव दु:खं विवेक: सुमहानिव। १३॥
नभसोऽभ्रान् Ya: पङ्कान् कालुष्यं चाम्भस: शरत्।

इ'द्धैयाणं॥द्रैर्यार्थैभ्य: प्रत्याहारं इवाहरत्।। १४॥

अभ्यस्यतेऽनुदिवसं रेचकाकुम्भकादिभि:। १५॥

The autumnal sky was wholly free from
clouds, like the heart of the ascetic, whose
cares have been consumed by the fire of
devotion. The moon allayed the fervours of the
sun, aS discrimination alleviates the pain to
which egotism gives birth. The clouds of the
atmosphere, the muddiness of the earth, the
discoloration or the waters, were all removed
by autumn, as abstraction detaches the senses
from the objects of perception. The exercise of
inspiring, suppressing and expiring the vital
air, was as if performed daily by the waters of
the lakes (as they were full and stationary and
then again declined)’.

विमलाम्बरनक्षत्रे काले चाभ्यागन्तो व्रजम्।
ददर्शेन्द्रमहारम्भायौद्यतांस्तान् व्रजौकस:।। १६॥
कृष्णस्तानुत्सुकान् FLAT गोपानुत्सवलालसान्।
कौतूहलादिदं वाक्यं WE वृद्धान् महामति:।। १७॥
कोऽयं शक्रमहो नाम येन वो Bs आगत:।

At this season, when the skies were bright
with stars, Krsna, repairing to Vraja, found all
the cowherds busily engaged in preparing for a
sacrifice to be offered to Indra’; and going to
the elders, he asked them, as it out of curiosity,
what festival of Indra it was in which they
took so much pleasure.

We त्तं नन्दगोपश्च पृच्छन्तमतिसादरम्॥ १८॥
मेघानां पयसां चेशो देवराज: शतक्रतु:।
त्तेन सञ्चोदिता मेघा वर्धन्त्यम्बुमयं THN १९॥
