BOOK III, CHAP. 14

277

pilgrimage, at the end of the dark fortnight of
Magha.' The songs of the Pitrs confer purity of
heart, integrity of wealth, prosperous seasons,
perfect rites and devout faith; all that men can

desire. Hear the verses that constitute those

songs, by listening to which all those
advantages will be secured, oh prince, by you.
'That enlightened individual who begrudges
not his wealth, but presents us with cakes,
shall be born in a distinguished family.
Prosperous and affluent shall that man ever be,
who in honour of us gives to the Brahmanas. if
he is wealthy, jewels, clothes, land,
conveyances, wealth or any valuable presents;
or who, with faith and humility, entertains
them with food, according' to his means, at
proper seasons. If he cannot afford to give
them dressed food, he must, in proportion to
his ability, present them with unboiled grain or
such gifts, however trifling, as he can bestow.
Should he be utterly unable even to do this, he
must give to some eminent Brahmana, bowing
at the same time before him, sesamum-seeds
adhering to the tips of his fingers and sprinkle
water to us, from the palms of his hands, upon
the ground; or he must gather, as he may,
fodder for a day and give it to a cow; by which
he will, if firm in faith, yield us satisfaction. If
nothing of this kind is practicable, he must go
to a forest and lift up his arms to the sun and
other regents of the spheres and say aloud—

न मेऽस्ति fad न धनं न चान्य-
तृप्यन्तु भक्त्या पितरो मयैतो
Hat भुजौ वर्त्मनि मारुतस्य॥३०॥

"I have no money, nor property, nor grain,
nor anything whatever fit for an ancestral
offering. Bowing therefore to my ancestors, I
hope the progenitors will be satisfied with
these arms tossed up in the air in devotion.’

और्व उवाच
इत्येतत् पितृभिर्गीतिं भावाभावप्रयोजनम्।
a: करोति कृतं तेन श्राद्धं भवति पारथिव।॥ ३ en
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:॥ १४॥

These are the words of the Pitrs
themselves; and he who endeavours, with such
means as he may possess, to fulfil their
wishes, performs the ancestral rite called a
Sraddha.'

NOTES

1. We may here take the opportunity of inquiring
who are meant by the Pitrs; and generally speaking,
they may be called a, race of divine beings,
inhabiting celestial regions of their own and
receiving into their society the spirits of those
mortals for whom the rite of fellowship in
obsequial cakes with them, the Sapindikarana, has
been duly performed. The Pitrs collectively
therefore, include a man’s ancestors; but the
principal members of this order of beings are .of a
different origin. The Vayu, Matsya and Padma
Puranas and Hari Varnsa, profess to give an
account of the original Pitrs. The account is much
the same and for the most part in the same words,
in all. They agree in distinguishing the Pitrs into
seven classes; three of which are without form
(अमूर्त्ततऽ or composed of intellectual, not
elementary substance and assuming what forms
they please; and four are corporal (समूर्त्तय:), When
they come to the enumeration of the particular
classes they somewhat differ and the accounts in all
the works are singularly imperfect. According to a
legend given by the Vayu and the Hari Varhsa, the
first Pitrs were the sons of the gods. The gods
having offended Brahmi, by neglecting to worship
him, were cursed by him to become fools; but upon
their repentance he directed them to apply to their
sons for instruction. Being taught accordingly the
rites of expiation and penance by their sons. They
addressed them as fathers; whence the son of the
gods were the first Pitrs. 8 पुत्रानब्रुवन् प्रीता लब्धसंज्ञा
दिवौकस:। a4 चै पित्तरोऽस्माकं यैर्वयं प्रतिबोधिता:।। So the
Matsysa has मन्वन्तरेषु जायन्ते पितरो देवसूनव:। 'The Pitrs
are born in the Manvantaras as the sons of the
gods.’ The Hari Varnsa makes the sons assume the
character of fathers, addressing them, ‘Depart,
children:' गम्यतां पुत्रकाश्चेति पुत्रैरुक्ता:। Again; the Vayu
Purana declares the seven orders of Pitrs to have
been originally the first gods, the Vairdjas, whom
Brahma, with the eye of Yoga, beheld in the eternal
spheres and who are the gods of the gods :लौका
सान्तानिका नाम aa तिष्ठन्ति भास्वरा:। ते वैराजा इति ख्याता देवानां
