BOOK I, CHAP. 2

149

2. The shape of Meru, according to this
description, is that of an cverted cone; and by the
comparison to the seed-cup its form should be
circular: but there seems to be some uncertainty
upon this subject amongst the Paurdinikas. The
Padma compares its form to the bell-shaped flower
of the Dhutura. The Vayu represents it as having
four sides of different colours; or white on the east,
yellow on the south, black on the west, and red on
the north; but notices also various opinions of the
outline of the mountain, which, according to Atri
had a hundred angles; to Bhrgu, a thousand:
Savami calls it octangular; Bhaguri, quadrangular;
and Varsayani says it has a thousand angles: Galava
makes it saucer-shaped; Garga. twisted, like
braided hair; and others maintain that it is circular.
The Linga makes its eastern face of the colour of
the ruby; its southern, that of the lotus; its western,
golden and its northern, coral. The Matsya has the
same colours as the Vayu and both contain this
line; चतुर्वर्णुसौवर्णश्चतुरस्र: समुच्छित:। ‘Four coloured,
golden, four-comered lofty: but the Vayu compares
its summit in one place, to a saucer; and observes
that its circumference must be thrice its diameter:

`परिणाह: समन्तत:। The Matsya also
rather incompatibly, says the measurement is that
of a circular form but it is considered quadrangular:
श्च ‘agra: समाहित:। According to the
Buddhists of Ceylon, Meru is said to be of the same
diameter throughout. Those of Nepal conceive it to
be shaped like a drum. A translation of the
description of Meru and its surrounding mountains,
contained in the Brahmanda, which is the same
exactly as that in the Vayu, occurs in the As.
Researches. Vill. 343. There are some differences
in Wilford version from that which my MSS. would
authorize, but they are not in general of much
importance. Some, no doubt, depend upon variation
in the readings of the different copies: of others, I
must question the accuracy.

3. This diminution is the necessary consequence
of the diminished radius of the circle of Jambu-
dvipas. as the mountain ranges recede from the
centre.

4. These, being the two outer Varsas, are said to
take the form of a bow; that is, they are exteriorly
convex, being segments of the circle.

5. The whole diameter of Jambu-dvipa has been
said to be 100,000 Yojanas. This is thus divided

from north to south: [lavrta, in the centre, extends
each way 9000, making 18000: Meru itself, at the
base, is 16000: the six Varsas at 9000 each, are
equal to 54000 and the six ranges, at 2000 each, are
12000 and 18+16+54+12=100. From east to west
the Varsas are of the extent necessary to occupy the
space of the circle.

6. The Bhagavata and Padma call these Mandara,
Merumandara, Suparsva, and Kumuda.

7. Nauclea Kadamba, Eugenia Jambu, Ficus
religiosa, and F, Indica. The Bhagavata substitutes
a mango-tree for the Pipal; placing it on Mandara,
the Jambu on Merumandara. the Kadamba on
Suparsva, and the Vata on Kumuda.

8. The Bhagavata substitutes Sarvatobhadra for
the Gandhamadana forest; and calls the lakes, lakes
of milk; honey, treacle, dad sweet water.

9. The Vayu gives these names, and many more
and describes at great length forests, lakes, and
cities of gods and demi-gods upon these fabulous
mountains, or in the valleys between them, (As.
Res. VU, 354).

10. The Lokap4las. or eight deities in that
character, Indra, Yama. Varuna. Kuvera, Vivaswat,
Soma. Agni. and Vayu. Other cities of the gods are
placed upon the spurs, or filament mountains, by
the Vayu; or that of Brahma on Hemasringa, of
Sankara on Kalanjara. of Garuda on Vaikanka, and
of Kuvera on Kailasa. Himavat is also specified by
the same work as the scene of Siva's penance, and
marriage with Uma; of his assuming the form of a
Kirata, or forester; of the birth of Kartikeya, in the
Sara forest; and of his dividing the mountain
Kraufica with his spear. This latter legend, having
been somewhat misunderstood by Wilford, is made
the theme of one of his fanciful verifications.
“Here, he (the author of the Vayu) says in the forest
of Sankha. was born Shadanana or K4rtikeya, Mars
with six faces. Here he wished or formed the
resolution of going to the mountains of Kraujiica
Germany, part of Poland &c. to rest and recreate
himself after his fatigues in the wars of the gods
with the giants, There, in the skirts of the
mountains of Kraujica, he flung his sword; the very
same which Attila, in the fifth century, asserted he
had found under a clod of earth. It was placed in his
tomb, where it is probably to be found.” As, Res.
VIE. 364. The text of which this is in part a
representation is, d3 शरवण WH यत्र जात: षडानन:। यत्र चैव
