BOOK I, CHAP. 8

51

departed? Tell me truly, oh you who know all truth,
for a great doubt perplexes me.' Mahesvara spoke;
"IHustrious goddess, the excellenc patriarch Daksa
celebrates the sacrifice of a horse, and thither the
gods repair.’ Devi spoke; "Why then, most mighty
god, dos you also not proceed to this solemnity? by
what hindrance is your progress thither impeded?
MaheSsvara spoke; ‘This is the contrivance, mighty
queen, of all the gods. that in all sacrifices no
portion should be assigned to me. In consequence
of an arrangement formerly devised, the gods allow
me, of right, no participation of sacrificial
offerings.’ Devi spoke; ‘The lord god lives in all
bodily forms, and his might is eminent through his
superior faculties; he is unsurpassable, he is
unapproachable, in splendour and glory and power.
That such as he should be excluded from his share
of oblations, fills me with deep sorrow, and a
trembling, oh sinless, seizes upon my frame. Shall
1 now practise bounty, restraint, or penance, so that
my lord, who is inconceivable, may obtain a share,
a half or a third portion, of the sacrifice’?

“Then the mighty and incomprehensible deity,
being pleased, said to his bride, thus agitated; and
speaking; 'Slender-waisted queen of the gods. you
know not the purport of what you say; but I know
it, oh you with large eyes, for the holy declare all
things by meditation. By your perplexity this day
are all the gods. with Mahendra and all the three
worlds, utterly confounded. In my sacrifice, those
who worship me. repeat my praise?, and chant the
Rathantara song of the Sama veda; my priests
worship me in the sacrifice of true wisdom, where
no officiating Brahman is needed; and in this they
offer me my portion.’ Devi spoke; ‘The lord is the
root of all, and assuredly, in every assemblage of
the female world, praises or hides himself at will.’
Mahadeva spoke; ‘Queen of the gods, I praise not
myself: approach, and behold whom I shall create
for the purpose of claiming my share of the rite.’

“Having thus spoken to his beloved spouse, the
mighty Mahesvara created from his mouth a being
like the fire of fate; a divine being, with a thousand
heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet; wielding a
thousand clubs, a thousand shafts; holding the shell,
the discus, the mace, and bearing a blazing bow and
battle-axe; fierce and terrific, shining with dreadful
splendour, and decorated with the crescent moon:
clothed in a tiger's skin, dripping with blood;

having a capacious stomach, and a vast mouth,
armed with formidable tusks: his ears were erect,
his lips were pendulous, his tongue was lightning;
his hand brandished the thunderbolt; flames
screamed form his hair; a necklace of pearls wound
round his neck; a garland of flame descended on his
breast: radiant with lustre, he looked like the final
fire that consumes the world. Four tremendous
tusks .projected from a mouth which extended from
ear to ear ; he was of vast bulk, vase strength,
mighty male and lord, the destroyer of the universe,
and like a large fig-tree in circumference; shining
like a hundred moons at once; fierce as the fire of
love; having four heads, sharp white teeth, and of
mighty fierceness, vigour, activity, and courage;
glowing with the blaze of a thousand fiery suns at
the end of the world; like a thousand undimmed
moons; in bulk like Himadri,; Kailasa, or Meru, or
Mandara, with all its gleaming herbs; bright as the
sun of destruction at the end of ages; of irrcsistible
prowess, and beautiful aspect; irascible, with
lowering eyes, and a countenance burning like fire;
clothed in the hide of the elephant and lion, and girt
round with snakes; wearing a turban on his head, a
moon on his brow; sometimes savage, sometimes
mild; having a chaplet of many flowers on his head,
anointed with various unguents, and adorned with
diffcrent ornaments and many sores of jewels;
wearing a garland of heavenly Karnikara flowcrs,
and rolling his eyes with rage. Sometimes he
danced; sometimes he laughed aloud; sometimcs he
stood wrapt in meditation; sometimes he trampled
upon the earth; sometimes he sang; sonietimes he
wept repeatedly; and he was endowed with the
facuities of wisdom, dispassion, power, penance,
cruch, endurance, fortitude, dominion, and self-
knowledge.

“This being, then, knelt down upon the ground,
and raising his hands respectfully to his head, said
to Mahadeva, ‘Sovereign of the gods, command
what it is that I must do for you,’ To which
Maheswara replied, ‘Spoil the sacrifice of Daksa."
Then the mighty Virabhadra, having heard the
pleasure of his lord, bowed down his head to the
feet of Prajapati; and starting like a lion loosed
from bonds, despoiled the sacrifice of Daksa,
knowing that he had been Created by the
displeasure of Devi. She too in her wrath, as the
fearful goddess Rudrakali, accompanied him, with
