104

THE VISNU-PURANAM

9, भुवोऽन्तरूद्धर्वमधश्च। The commentator explains it
to mean the origin, duration, and termination of
subtile rudimental body: but the Padma and Linga
Purana distinctly express it, 'the extent of the earth:'
भुव: प्रमाण: सर्व्वत्र ज्ञात्वोद्धर्वमध Ta च।

10. Narada's  interfcrence, and the fruitless
generation of 'the first progeny of Daksa. is an old
legend. The Mahabharata (Adi P.) notices only one
set of sons, who, it is said, obtained Moksa, or
liberation. through Narada's teaching them the
Sankhya philosophy. The Brahma, Matsya, Vayu.
Linga. Padma, Agni, and Bhatgavata Puranas tell
the story much as in the text, and not inferquently
in the same words. In general they merely refer to
imprecation denounced upon Narada, as above. The
Bhagavata specifies the imprecation to be perpetual
peripateticism. Daksa says to him. There shall not
be a resting place for you in all these regions:"

ते मूढ न भवेद्भूमत: पदं। The Karma repeats
the imprecation merely to the effect that Narada
shall perish, and gives no legend. In the Brahma
Vaivaitta. Narada is cursed by Brahmi, on a similar
occasion, to become the chief of the Gandharvas,
whence his mus‘cal propensities: but the
Bhagavata, VI, 7. has the reverse of this legend,
and makes him first a Gandharva, then a Sidra,
then the son of Brahma. The Brahma Purana, and
after it the Hari Vamsa and the Vayu P,. have a
different and not very intelligible story. Daksa,
being about to pronounce an imprecation upon
Narada, was appeased by Brahma and the Rsis.
And it was agreed between them that Narada
should be again born; as the son of Kasyapa. by one
of Daksa's daughters. This seems to be the gist of
the legene, but it is very confusedly told. The
version of the Brahma Purana, which is the same as
that or Hari Vamsa, may be thus rendered: “The
smooth-speaking Narada addressed the sons of
Daksa for their destruction and his own: for the
Muni Kasyapa begot him as a son, who was the son
of Brahma, on the daughter of Daksa, through fear
of the latter's imprecation. He was formerly the son
of Paramesthi (Brahma). and the excellent sage
Kasyapa next begot him, as if he were his father, on
Asikni. the daughter of Virana. Whilst be was
engaged to beguiling the sons of the patriarch, Daks
a, of resistless power, determined on_ his
dceatruction; but he was solicited by Brahm, in this
presence of the great sages, and.it was agreed

between'them that Narada, the son of Barhméa,
should be born of a daughter of Daksa.
Consequently Daksa gave his daughter to
Parameshthi. and by her was Narada born.’ Now
several difficulties occur here. Asikni is the wife,
not the daughter. of Daksa: but this may be a
blunder of the compiler, for in the parallel passage
of the Vayu no name occurs. In the next place,
‘who is this daughter? for, as we shall see. the
progeny of all Daksa's daughters are fully detailed,
and in no authority consulted is Narada mentioned
as the son of either of them. or as the son of
Kasyapa. Daksa. too, gives his daughter, not to
Kasyapa. but to Paramesthi. or Brahma. The
commentator of the Hari Varnsa solves this by
saying he gives her to Brahma for Kasyapa. The
same bargain is noticed in the Vayu, but Narada is
also said there to be adopted by Kagyapa: 4 fay:
कश्यपस्येति कृत्रिम:। Again, however, it gives Daksha's
imprecation in the same words as the Hari Varhga, a
passage, by the way, omitted in the Brahma: नारद
नाशमेहीति गर्भवासं वसेति च। Narada, (in your present
form). and take up your abode in the womb.'
Whatever may be the original of this legend, it is
evidently imperfectly given by the authorities here
cited. The French translation of the passage in the
Hari Varhsa can scarcely be admitted as correct :
assuredly असिकन्यामथवैरिण्यां भूयो देवर्षिसत्तम:। तं भूयो
जनयामास पितेव च मुनिपुंगवं। is not le Devarchi Dakcha.
epoux d'Asikni. fille de Virana, fut | 'aieul de cet
illustri mouni ainsi regenere, देवर्षिसत्तम: is more
consistenly said by the commentator to mean
Kasyapa The Vayu Purana in another part, a
description of the different orders of Rsis, states
that the Devarsis Parvata and Narada were sons of
Kagyapa : Wad! नारदश्चैव कश्यपस्यात्मजावुभौ। In the
account of Karttavirya. in the Brahma Purana and
Hari VarnSa, Narada is introduced as a Gandharbha.
the son of Varidisa; being the same, according to
the commentator on the latter, as the Gandharva
elsewhere called Upavarhana.

11. The prior specification (p. 96) was fifty. The
Mahabharata, Adi P.. and, again, Moksa Dharma,
has the same number. The Bhagavata, Kurma,
Padma, Linga. and Vayu Purana state sixty. The
former is perhaps the original, as the fullest and
most consistent details relate to them and _ their
posterity.
