124 THE VISNU-PURANAM
भूमिरापो नभो वायु: शब्द: स्पर्शस्तथा रस:॥६८॥ gods and the fathers of mankind, receivest
रूपं गन्धो मनो बुद्धिरात्मा कालस्तथा गुणा:। प्)ष्णाय्-र्णंडिग्र्पुंतेप्नष्टुऽ and a
एतेषां परमार्थञ्च सर्वमेतत् त्वमच्युत।। ६९॥ er महत् fer ॥

Prahlada said~ "Glory to you, god of the वतश्च सूक्ष्म me शा

lotus eye: glory to you, most excellent of रूषाणि सर्वाणि च ervey

spiritual things : glory to you, soul of all `स्तेष्वन्तरात्माख्यमतीव सूक्ष्मम्॥७४॥

worlds: glory to you, wielder of the sharp wea qeanfefasrrorra-

discus: glory to the best of Brahmans; to the

friend of Brahmans and of kine; to Krsna, the . मगोचरे यत् परमात्मरूपम्।

preserver of the world: to Govinda be glory. किमप्यचिन्त्यं तव रूपमस्ति

To him who, as Brahma, creates the universe;
who in its existence if its preserver; be praise.
To you, who at the end of the Kalpa. takest the
form of Rudra; to you, who are triform; be
adoration. You, Acyuta, are the gods, Yaksas,
demons, saints, serpents, choristers and
dancers of heaven, goblins, evil spirits, men,
animals, birds, insects, reptiles, plants, and
stones, earth, water, fire, sky, wind, sound,
touch, taste, colour, flavour, mind, intellect,
soul, timc, and the qualities of nature: you are
all these, and the chief object of them all.

विद्याविद्ये war सत्यमसत्यं त्वं विषासृते।

vans निवृत्तञ्च कर्म्म वेदोदितं भवान्॥७०॥

समस्तकर्म्मभोक्ता च कर्म्मपकरणानि च।

त्वमेव faut! सर्वाणि सर्वकर्म्मफलञ्च यत्॥७१॥

मय्यन्यत्र तथाशेषभूतेषु भुवनेषु च।

waa व्याप्तिरैश्चर्य्यगुणसंसूचिका प्रभो।।७२॥

wai योगिनश्चिन्तयन्ति wat यजन्ति च यच्विन:।

हव्यकव्यभुगेकस्त्वं पितृदेवस्वरूपधूक्।। ७३॥

You are knowledge and ignorance, truth
and falsehood, poison and ambrosia. You are
the performance and discontinuance of acts*:
you are the acts which the Vedas enjoin: you
are the enjoyer of the fruit of all acts, and the
means by which they are accomplished. You.
Visnu, who are the soul of all, are the fruit of
all acts of piety. Your universal diffusion,
indicating might and goodness, is in me, in
others, in all creatures, in all worlds. Holy
ascetics meditate on you: pious priests
sacrifice to you. You alone, identical with the

तस्मै नमस्ते पुरुषोत्तमाय।।७५॥
सर्वभूतेषू सर्वात्मन्! या शक्तिरपरा तव।
गुणाश्रया नमस्तस्यै शाश्वतायै सुरेश्वर।७६॥
यातीतगोचरा वाचां मनसाञ्चाविशेषणा।
ज्ञानिज्ञानपरिच्छिद्या तां वन्दे चेश्वरीं पराम्।॥७७॥
व्यतिरिक्तं न यस्यास्ति व्यतिरिक्तोऽखिलस्य य:।७८॥

The universe is you intellectual form;'
whence proceedcd you subtile form, this
world: thence are you all subtile elements and
elementary beings, and the subtile principle,
that is called soul, within them. Hence the!
supreme soul of all objects, distinguished as
subtile or gross, 'which is imperceptible, and
which cannot be conceived, is even a form of
you. Glory be to you, Pursottama; and glory to
that imperishable form which, soul of all, is
another manifestation of you might, the
asylum of all qualities, existing in all
creatures. I salute her, the supreme goddess,
who is beyond the senses; whom the mind, the
tongue, cannot define; who is to be
distinguished alone by the wisdom of the truly
wise.

नमस्तस्मै नमस्तस्मै नमस्तस्मै महात्मने।

ATS न यस्यैको योऽस्तित्वेनोपलभ्यते।। ७९॥
यस्यावताररूपाणि समर्च्चन्ति दिवौकस:।
अपश्यन्त: परं रूपं नमस्तस्मै महात्मने।। ८०॥

Om! Salutation to Vasudeva: to him who is
the eternal lord; he from whom nothing is
distinct; he who is distinct from all. Glory be
