244

THE VISNU-PURANAM

be 1987; of the Satapatha Brahmana of the same
Veda 7624; and of the Atharvan 6015.

6. Or of stories (Akhyanas) and minor stories or
tales (Upakhyanas); of portions dedicated to some
particular divinity, as the Siva gita, Bhagavadgita;
and accounts of the periods called Kalpas, as the
Brahma kalpa, Varaha kalpa, etc.

7. For remarks upon this enumeration see
Introduction.

8. A similar enumeration is given in the Vayu,
with some additions. Rsis is derived from Rs, ‘to
got to' or ‘approach’. The Brahmarsis, it is said, are
descendants of the five patriarchs, who were the
founders of races or gotras of Brahmanas or
Kasyapa, Vasistha, Angiras, Atri and Bhrgu. The
Devarsis are Nara and Narayana, the sons of
Dharma; the Balakhilyas, who sprung from Kratu;
Kardama, the son of Pulaha; Kubera, the son of
Pulastya; Acala, the son of Pratyiisa; Narada and
Parvata, the sons of Kasyapa. Rajarsis are Iksvaku
and other princes. The Brahmarsis dwell in the
sphere of Bhrama; the Devarsis in the region of the
gods; and the Rajarsis in the heaven of Indra.

9. No notice is taken here of a curious legend
which is given in the Mahabharata, in the Gada
Parvan. It is there said, that during a great drought
the Brahmanas, engrossed by the care of
subsistence, neglected the study of the sacred books
and the Vedas were lost. The Rsi Sarasvata alonc,
being fed with fish by his mother Sarasvatf, the
personified river so named, kept up his studies and
preserved the Hindu scriptures. At the end of the
famine the Brahmanas repaired to him to be taught
and sixty thousand disciples again acquired a
knowledge of the Vedas from Sarasvata. This
legend appears to indicate the revival or more
probably the introduction, of the Hindu ritual by
the race of Brahmanas or the people called
Sarasvata; for, according to the Hindu geographers,
it was the narne of a nation, as it still is the
appellation of a class of Brahmanas who chiefly
inhabit the Punjab. (As. Res. VI. 219, 338, 341).
The Sarasvata Brahmanas are met with in many
parts of India and are usually fair-complexioned,
tall and handsome men. They are classed in the Jati
malas or popular lists of castes, amongst the five
Gauda Brahmanas and are divided into ten tribes;
they are said also to be especially the Purohitas or
family priests of the Ksatriya or military castes;

(see the Jati mala, printed in Price's Hindi
Selections, IJ. 280); circumstances in harmony with
the purport of the legend and confirmatory of the
Sarasvatas of the Punjab having been prominent
agents in the establishment of the Hindu religion in
India. The holy land of the Hindus or the primary
seat, perhaps, of Brahmanism, has for one of its
boundaries the Sarasvati river : see Bk. II. Ch.IV. n.
7.
kek
