BOOK II, CHAP. 3

155

people of Kurukasetra, or the upper part of the
Doab about Delhi. The P§&ficdlas, it appears from
the Mahabharata, occupied the lower part of the
Doab, extending across the Yamuna to the
Chambal. Kullika Bhatta, in his commentary on
Manu, II-19, places them at Kanouj. Kamarupa ia
the north-eastern part of Bengal, and western
portion of Assam. Pundra is Bengal proper, with
part of south Behar and che Jungle Mahal. Kalinga
is the sea-coast west of the mouths of the Ganga,
with the upper part of the Coroinandel coast.
Magadha is Bihar. The Saurdstras are the people of
Surat. the Surastrene of Ptolemy. The Siras and
Bhiras, in the same direction. may be the Sun and
Phauni or Phryni of Strabo. The Arbudas must be
the people about mount Abu, or the natives of
Mewar. The Karusas and Malavas are of course the
people of Malwa. The Sauviras aud Saindhavas are
usually conjoined as the Sindhu-Sauviras, and must
be the nations of Sindh and western Rajputana. By
the Hinas we are to understand the white Huns or
Indo-Scythians, who were established in the Punjab
and along the Indus at the commencement of our
era, as we know from Arrian, Strabo, and Ptolemy,
confirmed by recent discoveries of their coins. The
Salwas or, as also read s&lyas are placed by the
Vayu and Matasya amongst the central nations, and
seen to have occupied part of Rajasthan, a Salwa
Raja being elsewhere described as engaging in
hostilities with the people of Dwaraka in Guzerat.
Sakala. as 1 have elsewhere noticed, is a city in the
Punjab (As. Res. XV. 108), the Sagala of Ptolemy
(ibid. 107); the Mahabharata makes it the capital of
the Madras, the Mardi of the ancients; but they are
separately named in the text, and were situated
something more to the south-east. The Ramas and
Ambashthas are not named in other Puranas, but
the latter are amongst the western, or more properly
north-western nations subjugated by Nakula. in his
Dig-vijaya. Mahabh. Sabha P. Ambas and and
Ambashthas are included in the list extracted by
Wilford from the Varaéha Samhita and the latter are
supposed by him to be the Ambasta of Arrian. The
Parasikas carry us into Persia, or that part of it
adjoining to the Indus. As far as the enumeration of
the text extends, it seems applicable to the political
and geographical divisions of India about the era of
Christianity.

7, Enjoyment in Svarga like punishment in
Naraka, is only for a certain period, according to
the merit or demerit of the individual. When the
account is balanced, the man is born again amongst
mankind.

8. A crippled or mutilated person, or one whose
organs are defective cannot at once obtain
liberation: his merits must first secure his being
born again perfect and entire.

TOPOGRAPHICAL LISTS
From the Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva. II. 342
MOUNTAINS AND RIVERS!

Safijaya speaks to Dhrtarashtra- Hear me,
monarch, in reply to your inquiries, detail to you
the particulars of the country of Bharata.

Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktimat,’
Gandhamadana, Vindhya, and Paripatra are the
seven mountain ranges: as subordinate portions of
them are thousands of mountains; some unhearc of,
though lofty, extensive, and abrupt; and others
better known, though of lesser elevation, and
inhabited by people of low stature:’ there pure and
degraded tribe, mixed together, drink’ of the
following streams: the stately Ganga, the Sindhu,
and the Sarasvatt;> the Godavari, Narmada, and the
great river Bahuda:® the Satadru, Candrabhaga, and
great river Yamuna; the Drsadvati,’ Vipasa,” and
Vipapa, with coarse sands; the Vettavati, the deep
Krishnaveni, the Iravati,° Vitasta,° Payoshnt"! and
Devika!® the Vedasmrita,!? Vedavati,'4 Tridiva,
Iksumalavi Karithini, Chitrabaha, the deep
Chitrasené, the Gomati, the Dhitapapa and the
great river Gandaki;'® the Kausiki, Nischita,’’
Krtya, Nichita Lonatarini,® Rabasya Satakumbha,”°
and also the Sarayi the Carmanvati,
Candrabhaga,”” Hastisoma, Dis,  Saravati,”!
Payoshni, Para,” and Bhimarathi,” Kaveri,”
Chulaka,” Vina,?> Satabala,2” Nivara, Mahita,’’
Suprayoga,”* Pavitta,”” Kundala, Sindhu,” Rajani,’ ॥
Purvabhirama, Vira, Bhima,” Oghavati, Palasini,”
Papahatra, Mahendra, Patalavatt,** Karigini, Asikni,
the great river Kusachira,?> the Makari,®* Pravatra,
Mena,?” Hema, and Dhrtavati,”* Puravati,”’
Anushna,”” Saivya, Kapi,” Sadanira. Adhrisy4 the
great river Kusadhara,”” Sadakanta,” Siva,
Viravati, Vastu,“* Suvastu,*> Gauri, Kampana,””
Hiranvati, Vara, Virankar4, Paficami, Rathachitra,
Jyotiratha Visvamitra,’” Kapinijala, Upendra,
