BOOK III, CHAP. 12

the presence of a superior, but sit with
modesty in the posture called Virasana (or on
his knees). He must ncver pass round a temple
upon his left hand, nor perform the ceremony
of circumambulating any venerable object in
the reverse direction. A decent man will not
spit, nor eject any impurity, in front of the
moon, fire, the sun, water, wind or any
respectable person,° nor will he void urine
standing, nor upon the highway: he will never
step over phlegm ordure, urine or blood; nor is
the expectoration of the mucus of the throat
allowable at the time of eating, offering
sacrifices or oblations or repeating prayers or
in the presence of a respectable person.

योषितो नावमन्येत न चासां विश्वसेद बुध:।
न चवेर्षुर्भवेत्ताश्च नाधिकुर्यात् कदाचन।। ३ oll

माङ्गल्यपुष्परत्राज्यपूज्याननभिवाद्य च।

न निष्कामेद् गृहात् प्राज्ञ सदाचारपरो नर:॥३१॥
चतुष्पथान् नमस्कुर्यात् काले होमपरो भवेत्।
दीनानभ्युद्धरेत् साधूनुपासीत बहुश्रुतान्॥ ३ २॥
देवषिपूजक: सम्यक् पितृपिण्डोदकप्रद:।

सत्कर्ता चातिथीनां य: स लोकानुत्तमान् व्रजेत्।। ३३॥
हितं मितं प्रियं काले वश्यात्मा योऽभिभाषते।

स याति लोकानाह्लादहेतुभूतान् नृपाक्षयान्॥३४॥
धीमान् ह्रीमान् क्षमायुक्त आस्तिको विनयान्वित।
विद्याभिजरवृद्धानां याति लोकाननुत्तमान्॥ ३५॥

"Let not a man treat women with
disrespect, nor let him put entire faith in them.
Let him not deal impatiently with them, nor set
them over matters of importance. A man who
is attentive to the duties of his station will not
go forth from his house without saluting the
chaplets, flowers, gems, clarified butter and
venerable persons in it. At proper seasons he
will salute respectfully the places where four
roads meet, when engaged in offering
oblations with fire. Let him liberally relieve
the virtuous who are poor and reverence those
who are learned im the: Vedas.:He who is a
worshipper. of the: gods .and sages;: who: gives
cakes..and water:.to the .manes and who

269

exercises hospitality, obtains the highest
regions after death. He who speaks wisely,
moderately and kindly, goes to those worlds
which are the inexhaustible sources of
happiness. He who is intelligent, modest,
devout and who reverences wisdom, his
superiors and the aged, goes to heaven.

अकालगर्जितादौ च पर्वस्वाशौचकादिषु।
अनध्यायं बुध: कुर्यादुपरागादिके तथा।। ३६॥
शमं नयति a: Har सर्वबन्धुरमत्सरी।

भीताश्वासनकृत् Wg: स्वर्गस्तस्याल्पकं HEMT ३७॥

On the days called Parvas, on periods of
impurity, upon unseasonable thunder and the
occurrence of eclipses or atmospheric portents,
a wise man must desist from the study of the
Vedas.” The pious man who suppresses anger
and envy, who is benevolent to all and allays
the fears of others, secures, as the least of his
rewards, enjoyment in Svarga.

वर्षातपादिके च्छत्री दण्ठी रत्र्यटवीषु च।

शरीरत्राणकामो वै सोपानत्क: सदा ITN ३८॥।
नोर्द्ध न तिर्यग् दूरं वा निरीक्षन् wee बुध:।
युगमात्रं महीपृष्ठं नरो गच्छेद्बिलोकयन्।।३९॥

A man should carry an umbrella, as a
defence against sun and rain; he should bear a
staff when he goes by night or through a
wood; and he should walk in shoes, if he
desires to keep his body from harm. As he
goes along he should not look up, nor about

him, nor afar off, but keep his eyes upon the
ground to the extent of a couple of yards.

दोषहेतूनशेषांस्तु वश्यात्मा यो निरस्यति।

weg धर्मार्थकामानां हानिर्नाल्पापि जायते।।४०॥
(सदाचाररत: प्राज्ञो विद्याविनयशिक्षित:।)
पापेऽप्यपाप: परुषेऽप्यभिधत्ते प्रियाणि a:
मैत्रीद्रवान्त:रकरणस्तस्य मुक्ति: Hr Fermi ४१॥

"The householder who expels all sources of
imperfection is in a great degree acquitted of
the thrce ordinary objects of existence, desire,
wealth and virtue; sinless amongst the sinful;
speaking amicably to allmen; his whole soul
