126

प्रक्षिप्य तस्मात् सलिलान्निश्चक्राम महामति:।॥ ६॥
दृष्रा च स जगद् भूयो गगनाद्युपलक्षणम्।
प्रह्लादोऽस्मीति सस्मार पुनरात्मानमात्मना।॥ ७॥
तुष्टाव च पुनर्धीमाननादिं पुरुषोत्तमम्।
एकाग्रमतिरव्यग्रो यतवाक्कायमानस:।॥ ८॥।

ParaSara said—-Thus meditating upon Vis
nu, as identical with his own spirit, Prahlada
became as .one with him, and finally regarded
himself as the divinity : he forgot entirely his
own individuality, and was conscious of
nothing else than his being the inexhaustible,
cternal, supreme soul; and in consequence of
the efficacy of this conviction of identity, the
imperishable Visnu, whose essence is wisdom,
became present in his heart, which was wholly
purified from sin. As soon as, through the
force of his contemplation, Prahlada had
become one with Visnu, the bonds with which
he was bound burts instantly asunder; the
ocean was violently uplifted; and the monsters
of. the deep were alarmed; earth with all her
forests and mountains trembled; and the
prince, putting aside the rocks which the
demons bad piled upon him, came forth from
out the main. When he beheld the outer world
again, and contemplated earth and heaven, he
remembered who he was, and recognised
himself to be Prahlada; and again he hymned
Purusottama, who is without beginning or end;
his mind being steadily and undevia cingly
addressed to the object of his prayers, and his
speech, thoughts, and acts being firmly under
control.

Were उवाच
ऊँ नम: परमार्थार्थ स्थूलसूक्ष्मक्षराक्षर।
व्यक्ताव्यक्त कलातीत सकलेश ASH ९॥
गुणाञ्जन गुणाधार निर्गुणात्मन् गुणस्थिर।
मूर्त्तमूर्तं महामूर्ते YETTA स्फूटास्फुट।। १०॥
करालसौम्यरूपात्मन् विद्याविद्यालयाच्युत।
सदसद्रूप सद्भाव सदसद्भावभावन।। ११॥
नित्यानित्यप्रपञ्चात्मन् निष्प्रपञ्चामलाश्रित।
एकानेक नमस्तुभ्यं वासुदेवादिकारण।। १२॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

य: स्थूलसूक्ष्म: प्रकट: प्रकाशो
य: सर्वभूतो न च सर्वभूत:
र्ममोऽस्तु TA पुरुषोत्तमाय।। १३॥

"Om glory to the end of all: to you. lord,
who are subtile and substantial; mutable and
immutable; perceptible and impcrceptible;
divisible and indivisible; indefinable and
definable; the subject of attributes, and void of
attributes; abiding in qualities, though they
abide not in you; morphous, and amorphous;
minute and vast; visible and _ invisible;
hideousness and beauty; ignorance and
wisdom; cause and effect: existence and non-
existence; comprehending all that is good and
evil; essence of perishable and imperishable
elements; asylum of undeveloped rudiments.
Oh you who are both one and many,
Vasudeva, first cause of all; glory be unto you.
Oh you who are large and small, manifest and
hidden; who are all beings, and are not all
beings; and from whom, although distinct
from universal cause, the universe proceeds; to
you, Purusottama, be all glory."

पराशर उवाच।

तस्य तच्चेतसो देव: स्तुतिमित्थं प्रकुर्वत:।
आविर्बभूव भगवान् पीताम्बरधरो हरि:॥ १४॥
ससम्भ्रमस्तमालोक्य समुत्थायाकुलाक्षरम्।
नमोऽस्तु विष्णवेत्येतद् व्याजहारासकृद् द्विज।। १५॥

Whilst with mind intent on Visnu, he thus
pronounced his praises, the divinity, clad in
yellow robes, suddenly appeared before him.
Startled at the sight, with hesitating speech
Prahlada pronounced repeated salutations to
Visnu, and said,

Were sara
देव प्रपन्नात्तिहर प्रसादं HE केशव।
अवलोकनदानेन भूयो मां पावयाच्युत।। १६॥

Prahlada said— "Oh you who removest all
worldly grief, KeSava. be propitious unto me;
again sanctify me, Acyuta, by your sight."
