BOOK I, CHAP. 19

121

Then the ignorant Asura Samvara practised हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

subtile wiles for the extermination of the firm-
minded Prahlada: but he, with a tranquil heart,
and void of malice towards Samvara. directed
his thoughts uninterruptedly to the destroyer of
Madhu; by whom the excellent discus, the
flaming Sudarsana, was dispatched to defend
the youth; and the thousand devices of the
evil-destined Samvara were every one foiled
by this defender of the prince. The king of the
Daityas then commanded the withering wind
to breathe its blighting blast upon his son: and,
thus commanded, the wind immediately
penetrated into his frame, ` cold, cutting,
drying, and insufferable. Knowing that the
wind had entered into his' body, the Daitya
boy applied his whole heart to the mighty
upholder of the earth, and Janarddana, seated
in his heart, waxed wroth, and drank up the
fearful wind, which had thus hastened to its
own annihilation.

क्षीणासु सर्वमायासु wat च क्षयं गते।

जगाम सोऽपि wat गुरोरेव महामति:;।। २५॥

अहन्यहन्यथाचार्यो नीतिं राज्यफलप्रदाम्।

आहयामास तं बालं राज्ञामुशनसा FATT २६॥

गृहीतनीतिशास्त्रं तं विनीतञ्च यदा गुरु:।

`भेने तदैनं तत्पित्रे कथयामास शिक्षितम्॥ Von
आचार्य उवाच

प्रह्लादस्तत्त्वतो aft भार्गवेण aati २८॥

When the devices of Samvara were all
frustrated, and
perished, the prudent prince repaired to the
residence of his preceptor. His teacher
instructed him daily in the science of polity, as
essential to the administration of government,
and invented by Usanas for the benefit of
kings; and when he thought that the modest
prince was well grounded in the principles of
the science, he told the king that Prahlada was
thoroughly conversant with the rules of
government as laid down by the descendant of
Bhrgu.

the blighting wind had.

frag ada कथमरिवर्गेषु भूपति:;।

vere! fay कालेषु मध्यस्थेषु कथं चरेत्।। २९॥

कथं मन्रिष्वमात्येषु बाह्येष्वभ्यन्तरेषु च।

ang चौरवर्गेषु शङ्कितेष्वितरेषु च।। ३०॥

TRIS कथ्यतां सम्यक् तथा कण्टकशोधने।। ३१

एतच्चान्यच्च सकलमधीतं भवता यथा।

तथा मे कथ्यतां ज्ञातुं तवेच्छामि मनोगतम्।। ३ २॥

Hiranyakasgipu therefore summoned the
prince to his presence, and desired him to
repeat what he had learned; how a king should
conduct himselt towards friends or foes; what
measures he should adopt at the three periods
(of advance, retrogression, or stagnation); how
he should treat his councillors, his ministers,
the officers of his government and of his
household, his emissaries, his subjects, those
of doubtful allegiance, and his foes; with
whom should he contract alliance; with whom
engage in war; what sort of fortress he should
construct; how forest and mountain tribes
should be reduced; how internal grievances
should be rooted out: all this, and what else he
had studied, the youth was commanded by his
father to explain.

पराशर उवाच
प्रणिपत्य fag: पादौ तथा प्रश्रयभूषण:।। ३ ३॥
प्रह्लाद: We दैत्येन्द्रं कृताञ्जलिपुटस्तथा।

To this, Prahlada having bowed
affectionately and reverentially to the feet of
the king. touched his forehead and thus
replied:
प्रह्लाद sara

ममोपदिष्टं सकलं गुरुणा नात्र संशय:।

गृहीतञ्च war किन्तु न सदेतन्मतं मम।। ३४॥
साम चोपप्रदानञ्च भेददण्डौ तथापरौ।

उपाया: कथिता: ad मित्रादीनाञ्च साधने।। ३५॥
तानेवाहं न पश्यामि मित्रादींस्तात! मा क्रुध:।
