44

THE VISNU-PURANAM

to Visnu, representing him as the personification of
his anger, whilst Brahma is that of his kindness:
we: क्षये ललाटाच्च सुतौ देवस्य a तथा। eat a विबुधश्रेष्ठौ
प्रसादक्रोधजावुभौ। तदादेशितपन्थानौ सृष्टिसंहारकारकौ॥ The
Karma Purana makes him proceed from Brahma's
mouth, whilst engaged in meditating on creation.
The Varaha Purana makes this appearance of Rudra
the consequence of a promise made by Siva to
Brahma, that he would become his son. In the
parallel passages in other Puranas the progeny of
the Rudra created by Brahma is not confined to the
eleven, but comprehends infinite numbers of beings
in person and equipments like their parent; until
Brahma, alarmed at their fierceness, numbers, and
immortality, desires his son Rudra, or, as the
Matsya calls him, Vamadeva. to form creatures of a
different and mortal nature. Rudra refusing to do
this, desists; whence his name Sthanu. from Stha.
‘to stay,” Linga. Vayu Purana etc.

4, According to the Vayu, the female became
first twofold, or one half white, and the other black;
and each of these, again, becomes manifold, being
the various energies, or Saktis, of Mahadeva, as
stated by the Kiirma, after the words
fxd: | which are those of our text: ता वै विभूतयो fan
faga: शक्तयो भुवि। The Linga and Vayu specify
many of their names, Those of the white,
complexion, or mild nature, include Laksmi,
Saraswati, Gauri, Uma, etc. Those of the dark huc,
and fierce-disposition, Durga, Kali, Chandi,
Maharatri, and others.

5. Brahma, after detaching from himself the
property of anger, in the form of Rudra, converted
himself into two persons, the first male, or the
Manu Svayambhuva, and the first woman, or
Satariipa: so in the Vedas; Fa आत्मा वै पुत्रो नामासीत्।`ऽ०
himself was indeed (his) son.' The commencement
of production through sexual agency is here
described with sufficient distinctness, but the
subject has been rendered obscure by a more
complicated succession of agents, and especially by
the introduction of a person of a mythic or mystical
character. Viraj. The notion is thus expressed in
Manu: "Having divided his own substance, the
mighty power Brahma became half male and half
female; and from that female he produced Viraj.
Know me to be that person whom the male Viraj
produced by himself." 1. 32. 33. We have therefore
a series of Brahma, Viraj, and Manu, instead of

Brahma and Manu only: also the generation of
progeny by Brahma, begotten on Satariipa. instead
of her being, as in our text. the wife of Manu. The
idea seems to have originated with the Vedas, as
Kullika Bhatta quotes a text: am विडाडजायत। Then (or
thence) Virét was born.’ The procreation of
progeny by Brahm4, however, is at variance with
the whole system, which almost invariably refers
his creation to the operation of his will: and the
expression in Manu, wen स विराजमसृजत्। ‘he created
Viraj in her,’ does not necessarily imply sexual
intercourse. Viraj also creates, not begets, Manu.
And in neither instance does the name of Satarijpa
occur. The commentator on Manu, however,
understands the expression asrijat to imply the
procreation of Viraj ; मैथुन धर्म्मण। and the same
interpretation is given by the Matsya Purana, in
which the incestuous passion of Brahma for
Sataripa, his daughter in one sense, his sister in
another, is described; and by her he begets Viraj,
who there is called, not the progenitor of Manu, but
Manu himself, तत: कालेन महता तस्या: पुत्रो। ऽभवन्मनु:
स्वायम्भुव इति ख्यात: a विराडिति न: श्रुतं। This therefore
agrees with our text, as far as it makes Manu the
son of Brahma, though not us to the nature of the
connexion. The reading of the Agni and Padma
Purana is that of the Visnu; and the Bhagavata
agrees with it in one place, stating distinctly that the
male half of Brahma was Manu, the other half,
Satartpa: यस्यु तत्र पुमान् सोऽभून्मनु: स्वायम्भुव: स्वराट् स्त्री
यासीच्छतरूपाख्या महिष्यस्य महात्मन:। Bhagav. Ill. 12. 35:
and although the production of Viraj is elsewhere
described, it is neither as the son of Brahma, nor the
father of Manu. The original and simple idea,
therefore, appears to be, the ideality of Manu with
the male half of Brahma, and his being thence
regarded as his son. The Karma Purana gives the
same account as Manu, and in thc same words. The
Linga Purana and Vayu Purana describe the origin
of Viraj and Satariipa from Brahma; and they
intimate the union of Satariipa with Purusa or Virdj.
the male portion of Brahm, in the first instance;
and in the second, with Manu, who is termed
Vairaja. or the son of Viraj: वैराजस्तु मनु: स्मृत:। The
Brahma Purana the words of which are repeated in
the Hari Varnga, introduces a new element of
perplexity in a new name, that of Apava. According
to the commentator, this is a name of the Prajapati

Vasistha: आपवर्षे: वसिष्ठापरनाम्र: wardd:! As, however,
