190

THE VISNU-PURANAM

the fifteen Muhirttas of the day are thus
classed in five portions of three each. But the
day consists of fifteen Muhiirttas only at the
equinoxes, increasing or diminishing in
number in the northern and southern
declinations of the sun, when the day
encroaches on the night, or the night upon the
day, The equinoxes occur in the seasons of
spring and autumn, when the sun enters the
signs of Aries and Libra. When the sun enters
Capricorn (the winter solstice), his northern
progress commences; and his southern when
he enters Cancer (the summer solstice).

त्रिंशन्मूहूर्तं कथितमहोरात्रन्तु यन्मया।

तानि पञ्चदश ga! wer इत्यभिधीयते॥ ६४॥

We: पक्षद्वयेनोक्तो द्वौ मासौ चार्कजावृतु:।

ऋतृत्रयञ्चाप्ययनं द्वेऽयने वर्षसंज्ञितम्।। ६५॥

संवत्सरादय: wa चतुर्मासविकल्पिता:।

निश्चय: सर्वकालस्य युगमित्यभिधीयते।। & & 11

संवत्सरस्तु प्रथमो द्वितीय: परिवत्सर:।

इद्द्त्सरस्तृतीयस्तु चतुर्थश्चानुवत्सर:।

वत्सर: पञ्चमश्चात्र कालोऽयं युगसंज्ञित:।। ६७॥

Fifteen days of thirty Muhirttas each are
called a Paksa (a lunar fortnight); two of these
make a month; and two months, a solar
season; three seasons a northern or southern
declination (Ayana); and those two compose a
year. Years, made up of four kinds of
months, are distinguished into five kinds;
and an aggregate of all the varieties of time is
termed a Yuga, or cycle..The years are
severally called Samvatsara, Parivatsara,
Idvtasara, Anuvatsata, and Vatsara. This is the
time called a ।

a: श्वेतस्योत्तर: Pret: शृङ्गवानिति विश्रुत:।

त्रीणि तस्य तु शृङ्गाणि यैरसौ शृङ्गवान् स्मृत:।। SH
शरद्वसन्तयोर्मध्ये तद्भानु: प्रतिपद्यते।। ६ ९॥

मेषादौ च genet च मैत्रेय! विषुवत् स्थित:।
arsed वै तदेतदुभयं स्मृतम्॥७०॥

प्रथमे कृतिकाभागे यदा भास्वांस्तथा शशी।
विशाखानां चतुर्थेऽंशे yt! तिष्ठत्यसंशयम्।।७१॥
विशाखानां यदा सूर्यश्चरत्यंशं तृतीयकम्।

तदा चन्द्रं विजानीयात् कृत्तिकाशिरसि स्थितम्॥७२॥
तदैव विघुवाख्यो वै काल: पुण्योऽभिधीयते।

तदा दानानि देयानि देवेभ्य: प्रयतात्मभि:।। ७३॥
ब्राह्मणेभ्य: पितृभ्यश्च मुखमेतत् तु दानजम्।
दत्तदानस्तु विषुवे कृतकृत्योऽभिजायते।।७४॥

The mountain range that lies most to the
north (in Bharata-varsa) is called Sringavan
(the horned), from its having three principal
elevations (horns or peaks), one to the north,
one to the south, and one in the centre; the last
is called the equinoctial, for the sun arrives
there in the middle of the two seasons of
spring and autumn, entering the equinoctial
points in the first degree of Aries and of Libra,
and making day and night of equal duration, or
fifteen Muhirttas each. When the sun, most
excellent sage, is in the first degree of the
lunar mansion, Krttikd and the moon is in the
fourth of Visékha; or when the sun is in the
third degree of Visakha, and the moon. is in the
head of Krttiki (these positions being
contemporary with the equinoxes), that
equinoctial season is holy (and is styled the
Mahavisnubha, or the great equinox).’* At this
time offerings are to be presented to the gods
and to the manes, and gifts are to be made to
the Brahmanas by serious persons; for such
donations are productive of happiness.
Liberality at the equinoxes is always
advantageous to the donor: and day and night;
seconds, minutes, and hours; intercalary
months; the day of full moon (Paurnamasi);
the day of conjunction (Amavdsya), when the
moon rises invisible; the day when it is first
seen (Sinivali); the day when it first disappears
(Kuhii); the day when the moon is quite round
