THE VISNU-PURANAM

156

Bahula, Kuchira,“* Madhuvahini,” Vinadi,°°
Pinjala, Vena, tungavena,° 1 \/यें(येंयेंऽ’ब्रु,ऽष्ट Krishnavena,
Tamra, Kapila, Selu, Suvama,? Vedagva,

Harigrava, Mahopama,”* Sighra, Pichchhala,”° the
deep Bharadvaji, the Kausiki, the Sona, Bahuda,
and Candramd, Durga, Amtragila,*’ Brahmabodhya,
Vrhadvati, Yavaksa,°* Rohi, Jambunadi, Sunasa,”°
Tamasa,” dasi, Vasa, Varana, Asi,°’ Nala,
Dhrtamati, Pamasa,? Tamasi,? Vrshabha,
Brahmamedhya, Vrhadvati. These and many other
large streams, as the Krishna,” whose waters are

always salubrious, and the  siow-flowing
Mandavahini,” the Brahmani,© Mahdagauri,
Durga,®’ Chitropala, Chitraratha, Manjula,”

Mandakini,” Vaitarani,’' the great river Koga,” the
Muktimati,” Maninga,” Pushpaveni, Utpalavati,
Lohitya,” Karatoya,”© Vrisha-kahva,’”” Kumari,
Rigikulya,”® Marisha, Sarasvati, Mandakini,
Punya,” Sarvasangé, all these the universal
mothers, productive of abundance, besides
hundreds of inferior note, are the rivers of Bharata,
according to remembrance. *°

1. In attempting to verify the places or people
specified in the text various difficulties are to be
encountered, which must serve to apologize for but
partial success. Some are inherent in the subject,
such as the changes which have taken place in the
topography of India since the lists were compiled,
and the imperfectness of the specification itself,
States and tribes and cities have disappeared, even
from recollection, and some of the natural features
of the country, especially the rivers, have
undergone a total alteration. Buchanan (Description
of Eastern Hindustani) following Reanell over the
same ground at an interval of some thirty or forty
years, remarks that many of the streams laid down
in the Bengal Atlas (the only series of Maps of
India yet published, that can be regarded as of
authority) are no longer to be traced. Then the lists
which are given are such mere catalogues, that they
afford no clue to verification beyond names; and
names have been either changed or so corrupted, as
to be no longer recognizable. On the other hand,
much of the difficulty alixes from ourown want of
knowledge. Scattered through the Puranas and
other works, the names given in the topographical
lists recur with circumstances which fix their
locality; but these means of verification have not
yet been sufficiently investigated. There are also

geographical treatises in Sanskrit, which there is
reason to believe afford much accurate and
interesting information: they are not common.
Wilford speaks of having received a number from
Jaypur, but upon his death they disappeared. After
a considerable interval some of his MSS were
purchased for the Calcutta Sanskrit College, but by
far the larger portion of his collection had been
dispersed. A few leaves only on geographical
subjects were found, from which I translated and
published a chapter on the geography of some of
the districts of Bengal: (Calcutta Quarterly
Magazine, Dec. 1824:) the details were accurate
and valuable though the compilation was modern.
Notwithstanding these impediments, however, we
should be able to identify at least mountains and
rivers to a much greater extent than is now
practicable, if our maps were not so miserably
defective in their nomenclature. None of our
surveyors or geographers have been Oriental
scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have
been conversant with the spoken language of the
country: they have consequently put down names at
random, according to their own inaccurate
appreciation of sounds carelessly, vulgarly, and
corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are
crowded with appellations which bear no similitude
whatever either to past or present denominations.
We need not wonder that we cannot discover
Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the
immediate vicinity of Calcutta, Barnagore
represents | Varahanagar. Daksineswar is
metamorphosed into Duckinsore. and Uluberia is
Anglicised into Willoughbury. Going a little fatther
off, we have Dalkisore for Darikeswari, Midnapore
for Medinipur, and a most unnecessary
accumulation of consonants in Caughmahry for
Kakami§ari. There is scarcely a name in our Indian
maps that does not afford proof of extreme
indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an
incorrectness in estimating sounds, which is in
some degree, perhaps, a national defect.

2. The printed edition reads Saktimat, which is
also found in some MSS., but the more usual
reading is that of the text. I may here add that a
Suktimat mountain occurs in Bhima's invasion of
the eastern region. Mahabh. Sabha  P.
Gandhamadana here takes the place of Rksa.
