412

of the gods and addressing the divinities, with
Brahma at their head, related in piteous
accents all her distress.

पृथिव्युवाच
अग्नि: सुवर्णस्य गुरुर्गवां सूर्य: परो गुरु:।
ममार्थखिललोकानां गुरुर्नारायणो TE: १४॥
प्रजापतिपतिर्ब्रह्मा पूर्वषामपि पूर्वज:।
कला-काष्ठा-निमेषात्मा कालश्चाव्यक्तमूर्तिमान्॥ १५॥
तदंशभूत: सर्वेषां WTSI व: सुरोत्तमा:।
आदित्या मरुत: साध्या रुद्रा तस्वश्चि-वह्नय:।। १६॥
fart ये च लोकानां स्रष्टारोऽत्रिपुरोगमा:।
एतत् तस्याप्रमेयस्य रूपं विष्णोर्महात्सन:।। १७॥
गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्चैव we विष्णोर्महात्मन:।। १८॥
अहर्क्षतारकाचित्र-गगनाग्निजलानिला:।
अहञ्च विषयाश्चैतत् सर्वं विष्णुमयं जगत्॥१९॥
तथाप्यनेकरूपस्य तस्य रूपाण्यहर्निशम्।
बाध्यबाधकतां यान्ति HATA इव APTN Vo
तत् साम्प्रतमिमे दैत्या: कालनेमिपुरोगमा:।
AA समाक्रम्य बान्धन्तेऽहर्निशं प्रजा:।॥ २१॥
कालनेमिर्हतो योऽसौ विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना।
उग्रसेनसुत: HA: सम्भूत: स महासुर:।। २२॥
अरिष्टो धेनुक: केशी प्रलम्बो नरकस्तथा।
सुन्दोऽसुरस्तथात्युग्रो वाणश्चापि बले: सुत:।। २३॥
तथान्ये च महावीर्यां Fart भवनेषु ये।
समुत्पन्ना दुरात्मानस्तान् न संख्यातुमुत्सहे॥ २४॥
अक्षौहिण्योऽत्र agen दिव्यमूर्तिधृतां qa:
महाबलानां दृप्तानां दैत्येन्द्राणां ममोपरि॥ २५॥
तद्भूरिभारपीडारत्ता न शक्नोम्यमरेश्वरा:।
विभर्ततुमात्मानमहमिति विज्ञापयामि व:।। २६॥
क्रियतां तन्महाभागा: मम भारावतारणम्।
यथा रसातलं नाहं गच्छेयमिति fase २७॥
‘“‘Agni,’’ said Earth, ‘‘is the progenitor of
gold; Surya, of rays of light :° the parent and
guide of me and of all spheres is the supreme

Narayana, who is Brahma, the lord of the lord
of patriarchs; the eldest of the eldest born; one

THE VISNU-PURANAM

with minutes and hours; one with time; having
form, though indiscrete. This assemblage of
yourselves, O gods, is but a part of him. The
sun, the winds the saints, the Rudras. the
Vasus, the ASvins, fire, the patriarch creators
of the universe, of whom Atri is the first, all
are but forms of thc mighty and inscrutable
Visnu. The Yaksas, Raksasas, Daityas, spirits
of evil, serpents and children of Danu, the
singers and nympiis of heaven, are forms of
the great spirit, Visnu. The heavens painted
with planets, constellations and stars; fire,
water, wind and myself and every perceptible
thing; the whole universe itself—consists of Vis
nu. The multifarious forms of that manifold
being encounter and succeed one another,
night and day, likc the waves of the sea. At
this prescnt scason many demons, of whom
Kdlanemi is the chief, have over-run and
continually harass, the region of mortals. The
great Asura Kalancmi,” that was killed by the
powerful Visnu, has revived in Karhsa, the son
of Ugrasena and many other mighty demons,
more than I can enumerate, as Arista,
Dhenuka, Kesin, Pralamba, Naraka, Sunda and
the fierce Bana, the son of Bali,’ are born in
the palaces of kings. Countless hosts of proud
and powerful spirits, chiefs of the demon race,
assuming celestial forms, now walk the earth;
and, unable to support myself beneath the
incumbent load, I come to you for succour.
Illustrious deities, do you so act that I may be
relieved from my burden, lest helpless I sink
into the nethermost abyss."

पराशर उवाच

इत्याकर्ण्य धरावाक्यमशेषं त्रिदशैस्तत:।

भुवो भारावतारार्थं ब्रह्मा we प्रचोदित:।। २८॥

Pardsara said- When the gods had heard
these complaints of Earth, Brahma at their
request explained to them how her burden
might be lightened.

ब्रह्मोवाच
यथाह वसुधा सर्वं सत्यमेतद्दिवौकस:।
अहं भवो भवन्तश्च सर्वं नारायणात्मकम्।। २९॥
