BOOK VI, CHAP. 5

545

प्रकटीकृतसर्वास्थिर्नतपृष्ठास्थिसंहति:।
उत्सन्नजठराग्नित्वादल्पाहारोऽल्पचेष्टित:॥ २९॥
कृच्छ्रचड्क्रमणोत्थानशयनासनचेष्टित:। .
भन्दीभवच्छोत्रनेत्र: स्रवल्लालाविलानन:।॥ ३०॥
अनायत्तै: समस्तैश्च करणैर्मरणोन्मुख:।
तत्क्षणेऽप्यनुभूतानामस्मर्त्तखिलवस्तुनाम्।। ३ १।।

When old age arrives, the body is infirm;
the limbs are relaxed; the face is emaciate and
shrivelled; the skin is wrinkled, and scantily
covers the veins and sinews; the eye discerns
not afar off, and the pupil gazes on vacuity;
the nostrils are stuffed with hair; the trunk
trembles as it moves; the bones appear beneath
the surface, the back is bowed, and the joints
are bent; the digestive fire is extinct, and here
is little appetite and little vigour; walking,
rising, sleeping, sitting, are all painful efforts;
the ear is dull; the eye is dim; the mouth is
disgusting with dribbling saliva; the senses no
longer are obedient to the will; and as death
approaches, the things that are perceived even
are immediately forgotten.

सकृदुच्चारिति वाक्ये ARTETA: |

श्वास: काससमुद्भूतमहायासप्रजागर:।। ३ २॥

अन्येनोत्याप्यतेऽन्येन तथा संवेश्र्यते wah

भृत्यात्मपुत्रदाराणाप्रवामानस्पदीकृत:।। ३ ३॥

प्रक्षीणाखिलशौचश्च विहाराहारसस्पृह:।

area: परिजनस्यापि निर्विण्णाशेषवाव:।। ३४॥

अनुभूतमिवान्यस्मिन् जन्मन्यात्मविचेष्टितम्।

संस्मरन् यौवने दीर्घ नि:श्चसित्यभितापित:।। ३५॥

एवमादीनि दु:खानि जरायामनुभूय वै।

मरणे यानि दु:खानि प्राप्नोति शृणु तान्यपि।। ३ ६॥

The utterance of a single sentence is
fatiguing, the wakefulness is perpetuated by
difficult breathing, coughing, and painful
exhaustion. The old man is lifted up by
somebody else; he is clothed by somebody
else; he is an object of contempt to his
servants, his children, and his wife. Incapable
of cleanliness, of amusement, or food, or
desire, he is laughed at by his dependants, and

disregarded by his kin; and dwelling on the
exploits of his youth, as on the actions of a
past life, he sighs deeply, and is sorely
distressed. Such are some of the pains which
old age is condemned to suffer, I will now
describe to you the agonies of death.
श्लथग्रीवांध्रिहस्तोऽथ व्याप्तो वेपथुना भृशम्।
मुहुर्लानिपरवशो मुहुज्ञनलवान्वित:॥ ३७॥
we कथं भविष्यन्ति ममेति ममताकुल: ॥३८॥
शरैरिवान्तकस्योग्रैश्छिद्यमानास्थिबन्धन:। ३ ९॥
विवर्त्तमानताराक्षि हस्तपादं मुहु: क्षिपन्।
संशुष्यमाणताल्वोष्ठकण्ठो ॥४०॥
निरुद्धकण्ठो दीषैघैरुदानश्वासपीडित:।
तापेन महता व्याप्तस्तृषा चार्त्तस्तथा क्षुधा।४१॥
क्लेशादुत्क्रान्तिमाजोति याम्यकिङ्करपीडित:।

ततश्च यानतादेहं क्लेशेन प्रतिपद्यते॥।४२॥

एतान्यन्यानि चोग्राणि esa भरणे Jory!
HOS ATH यानि प्राप्यन्ते पुरुषैमृतै:॥४३॥

The neck droops; the feet and hands are
relaxed; the body trembles; the man is
repeatedly exhausted, subdued, and visited
with interrupted knowledge; the principle of
selfishness afflicts him, and he thinks what
will become of my wealth, my lands, my
children, my wife, my servants, my house?
The joints of his limbs are tortured with severe
pains, as if cut by a saw, or as if they were
pierced by the sharp arrows of the destroyer;
he rolls his eyes, and tosses about his hands
and feet; his lips and palate are parched and
dry, and his throat, obstructed by foul humours
and deranged vital airs, emits a rattling sound;
he is afflicted with burning heat, and with
thirst, and with hunger; and he at last passes
away, tortured by the servants of the judge of
the dead, to undergo a renewal of his
sufferings in another body. These are the
agonies which men have to endure when they
die. I will now describe to you the tortures
which they suffer in hell.
