BOOK II, CHAP. 6

177

पतन्ति येषु पुरुषा: पापकर्मरतास्तु ये॥६॥

(The names of the different Narakas are as
follows:) Raurava, Sdkara, Rodha, Tala,
ViSasana, Mahajvala, Taptakumbha, Lavana,
Vimohana, Rudhirandha, Vaitarani, Krimisa,
Krmibhojana, Asipatravana, Krsna, Lalabhaks
a. Déaruna, Puyavaha, Papa, Vahnijvala,
Adhosiras, Sandamsa. Kéalasiitra, Tamas,
Avichi, Svabhojana, Apratistha, and another
Avichi.2 These and many other tearful hells
are the awful provinces of the kingdom of
Yama, terrible with instruments of torture and
with fire; into which are hurled all those who
are addicted when alive to sinful practices.’

कूटसाक्षी तथा सम्यक् पक्षपातेन यो वदेत्।
यश्चान्यदनृतं वक्ति स नरो याति रौरवम्।।७॥
भ्रूणहा Wea च गोघ्नश्च मुनिसत्तम।

यान्ति ते नरकं Vet यश्चोच्छ्वासनिरोधक:॥ ८॥
सुरापो ब्रह्महा स्तेयी सुवर्णस्य च शूकरे।
प्रयाति नरके यश्च तै: संसर्गमुपैति वै।। ९॥
राजन्यवैश्यहा ताले तथैव गुरुतल्पग:।
तप्तकुण्डे स्वसृगामी BT राजभटांश्च A १०॥

The man who bear false witness through
partiality, or who utters any falsehood, is
condemned to the Raurava (dreadful) hell.-He
who causes abortion, plunders a town, kills a
cow, or strangles a man, goes to the Rodha
hell (or that of obstruciion). The murderer of a
Braéhmana, stealer of gold, or drinker of wine,
goes to the Sikara (swine) hell; as does any
one who associates with them. The murderer
of a man of the second or third caste, and one
who is guilty of adultery with the wife of his
spiritual teacher, is sentenced to the Tala
(padlock) hell: and one who holds incestuous
intercourse with a sister, or murders an
ambassador, to Taptakumbha (or the hell of
heated caldrons).

साध्वीविक्रयकृद्दद् बद्धपाल: केशरिविक्रयी।
तप्तलोहे पतन्त्येते यश्च भक्तं परित्यजेत्।। ११॥
स्नुषां सुताञ्चपि गत्वा महाज्वाले निपात्यते।
अवमन्ता TROT यो यश्चाक्रोष्टा नराधम:॥ १२॥

वेददूषयिता यश्च वेदविक्रयिकश्च य:।
अगम्यगामी यश्च स्यात् ते यान्ति लवणं fast १३॥
The seller of his wife, a gaoler, a
horsedealer, and one who deserts his
adherents, falls into the Taptaloha (red-hot
iron) hell. He who commits incest with a
daughter-in-law or a daughter is cast into the
Mahfjv4la hell (or that of great flame): and he
who is disrespeccful to his spiritual guide, who
is abusive to his betters, who reviles the
Vedas, or who sells them, who associates with

women in a prohibited degree, into the Lavana
(salt) hell.

चौरो विमोहे पतति मर्यादादूषकस्तथा।
देवद्विजपितृद्देष्टा रत्नदूषयिता च य:।

स याति क्रिमिभक्षे वै क्रिमीशे च दुरिष्टकृत्॥ १४॥
पितृदेवातिथीन् यश्च पर्यश्नाति नराधम:।
लालभक्षे स यात्युग्रे शरकर्त्त च aT १५॥
करोति कर्णिनो यश्च यश्च खड्गादिकृन्नर:।
प्रयान्त्येते विशसने नरके भ्रृशदारुणे।। १६॥

A thief and a contemner of prescribed
observances falls into Vimohana (the place of
bewildering). He who hates his father, the
Brahmanas, and the gods, or who spoils
precious gems, is punished in the Krmibhaksa
hell (where worms are his food): and he who
practises magic rites for the harm of others, in
the hell called Krmisa (that of insects), The
vile wretch who eats his meal before offering
food to the gods, to the manes, or to guests,
falls into the hell called Lalabhaksa (where
saliva is given for food). The maker of arrows
is sentenced to the Vedhaka (piercing) hell:
and the maker of lances, swords, and other
weapons, to the dreadful hell called Visasana
(murderous).

असत्प्रतिग्रहीता तु नरके यात्यधोमुखे।
अयाज्ययाजकश्चैव तथा नक्षत्रसूचक:।। १७॥
क्रिमिपूयवहञ्चैको याति मिष्टान्नभुङ् नर:।
लाक्षा-मांस-रसानाञ्च तिलानां लवणस्य च।
विक्रेता ब्राह्मणो याति तमेव नरकं द्विजा। १८॥
