116

CHAPTER 18
अष्टादशोऽध्याय:
(प्रह्लादस्य विनाशाय दैत्यान् प्रति
हिरण्यकशिपोरादेश:)

पराशर उवाच
आचचक्षु: स चोवाच सूदानाहूय WAT Il १।।
The Danavas. observing .the conduct of
Prahlada, reported it to the king, least they

should incur his despleasure. He sent for his
cooks, and said to them,

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच . .
3 सूदा मम पुत्रोऽसावन्येषामपि safe:
कुमार्गदेशको दुष्टो हन्यतामविलम्बितम्।। २॥
हालाहलं fat तस्य सर्वभक्ष्येषु दीयताम्।
अविज्ञातमसौ पापो हन्यतां मा विचार्यताम्॥३॥

O cooks! My vile and unprincipled son is
now teaching others his impious doctrines: be
quick, and put an end to him. Let deadly
poison be mixed-up with all his vainds,
without his knowledge. Hesitate not, but
destroy the wretch without delay,

पराशर उवाच
ते तथैव ततश्चक्रु: प्रह्लादाय महात्मने।
विषदानं यथाज्ञप्तं पित्रा तस्य महात्मन:॥४॥
हालाहलं विषं घोरमनन्तोच्चारणेन स:।
ara सहान्नेन मैत्रेय बुभुजे तदा।। ५
अविकारं स ag भुक्त्वा प्रह्लाद: स्वस्थमानस:।
अनन्तख्यातिनिर्वीर्य्य जरयामास तद्विषम्।। ६॥
ततस्तदा भयत्रस्ता जीर्णं दृष्टा महद्दिषम्।
दैत्येश्वरमुपागम्य प्रणिपत्येदमब्रुवन्।॥७॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Accordingly they did so, and administered
poison to the virtuous Prahlada, as his father
had commanded them. Prahlada, repeating the
name of the imperishable, ate and digested the
food in which the deadly poison had been
infused, and suffered no harm from it, either in
body or mind for it had been rendered
innocuous by the name of the eternal. Be-
holding the strong poison digested, those who
had prepared the food were filled with dismay,
and hastened to the king, and fell down before
him, and said,
सूदा ag:

दैत्यराज! fad दत्तमस्माभिरतिभीषणम्।

जीर्णं तेन सहान्नेन प्रह्लादेन सुतेन Ac

Cooks said- “King of the Daityas, the

fearful poison given by us to your son has

been digested by him along with his food, as if
it were innocent.

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
त्वर्यतां त्वर्यतां हे हे wer दैत्यपुरोहिता:
seat wer विनाशाय उत्पादयत मा चिरात्। ९॥
Hiranyakasipu, on hearing this, exclaimed,
"Hasten, hasten, ministrant priests of the
Daitya race I instantly perform the rites that
will effect his destruction !"

पराशर उवाच
सकाशमागम्य तत: प्रह्लादस्य पुरोहिता:।
सामपूर्वमथोचुस्ते प्रह्लादं विनयान्वितम्॥ १०॥

Then the priests went to Prahlada, and,
having repeated the hymns of the Sama-Veda,
said to him, as he respectfully hearkened.

पुरोहिता ऊचु:
जातस्त्रैलोक्यविख्यात आयुष्मन्। ब्रह्मण: कुले।
दैत्यराजस्य तनयो हिरण्यकशिपोर्भवान्।। ११॥
पिता ते सर्वलोकानां त्वं ata भविष्यसि।। १२॥
तस्मात् परित्यजैनां त्वं वियक्षस्तवसंहिताम्।
are पिता समस्तानां गुरूणां परमो Hs १३॥
