BOOK IV, 2

Munis rose and found that the water had been
drunk, they inquired who had taken it and said,
"The queen that has drunk this water shall give
birth to a mighty and valiant son." "It was I,"
exclaimed the Raja, "who unwittingly drank
the water!" and accordingly in the belly of
YuvandSva was conceived a child and it grew
and in due time it ripped open the right side of
the Raja and was born and the Raja did not
die. Upon the birth of the child, “who will be
its nurse?" said the Munis; when Indra, the
king of the gods, appeared and said, "He shall
have me for his nurse" (mam dhdasyati); and
hence the boy was named Mandhitri. Indra put
his forefinger into the mouth of the infant,
who sucked it and drew from it heavenly
nectar; and he grew up and became a mighty
monarch and reduced the seven continental
zones under his dominion. And here a verse is
recited; "From the rising to the going down of
the sun, all that is irradiated by his light, is the
land of Mandhitri, the son of Yuvanagva.""”

माथाता च शशबिन्दुदुहितरं बिन्दुमतीमुपयेमे,
पुरुकुत्समम्बरीषं मुचुकुन्दञ्च तस्यामपत्यत्रयमुत्पादयामास।
`पञ्चाशच्च दुहितरस्तस्य नृपतेर्बभूवु:।। १८॥

Mandhata married Bindumati, the daughter
of Sagabindu and had by her three sons,
Purukutsa, Ambarisa and Mucukunda; he had
also fifty daughters.”°

बह्वृचश्च सौभरिर्नाम ऋधिरन्तर्जले greyed काल-
Yara १९॥
तत्र चान्तर्जले सम्मदनामातिबहुप्रजोऽतिप्रमाणो

सहातिरमणीयं ललितमवेक्ष्याचिन्तयत्।। २ ०॥

अहो धन्योऽयमीदृशमपि अनभिमतं योन्यन्तरमवाप्य
एभिरात्मजपोत्रादिभि: सह रममाणोऽतीव्रास्माकं
स्पृहामुत्पादयति। वयमप्येवं पुत्रादिभि: we रमयिष्याम:।

309

The devout sage Saubhari, learned in the
Vedas, had spent twelve years immersed in a
piece of water; the sovereign of the fish in
which, named Sammada, of large bulk, had a
very numerous progeny. His children and his
grandchildren were wont to frolic around him
in all directions and he lived amongst them
happily, playing with them night and day.
Saubhari the sage, being disturbed in
devotions by their sports, contemplated the
patriarchal felicity of the monarch of the lake
and reflected, "How enviable is this creature,
who, although born in a degraded state of
being, is ever thus sporting cheerfully amongst
his offspring and their young. Of a truth he
awakens in my mind the wish to taste such
pleasure and I also will make merry amidst my

children."

saaafraies aq Tease ae:
निर्वेष्टुकाम: कन्यार्थं मान्धातारं राजानमगच्छत्।। २१॥

Having thus resolved, the Muni came up
hastily from the water and desirous of entering
upon the condition of a householder, went to
Ma&ndhata to demand one of his daughtcrs as
his wife.

अथागमनश्रवणसमनन्तरं चोत्याय तेन राज्ञा सम्यग्
निर्वेष्टुकामोऽस्मि नरेन्द्र कन्यां
प्रयच्छ मे मा प्रणयं विभाङ्खी:।
ककुत्स्थगोत्रे विमुखा: प्रयान्ति।। २ २॥
अन्येऽपि सन्त्येव नृपा: पृथिव्यां
क्ष्मापाल येषां तनया: प्रभूता:।
किन्त्वर्थिनामथितदानदीक्षा-
कृतव्रतं श्लाघ्यमिदं Het ते॥ २३॥
शृतार्द्धसङ्घद्यास्तव सन्ति कन्या-
स्तासां भमैकां नृपते। प्रयच्छ।
यत् प्रार्थनाभङ्गभयाद् बिभेमि
TETAS राजवरातिदु:खात्।। २४॥
As soon as he was informed of the arrival
of the sage, the king rose up from his throne,
