BOOK II, CHAP. 13

राजोवाच

प्रत्यक्षं दृश्यसे पीवानद्यापि शिबिका त्वयि।
श्रमश्च भारोद्बहने भवत्येव fe देहिनाम्।। ६३॥

The king replied, “I clearly sec that you are
stout, and that the palankin is borne by you;
and the carriage of a burden is wearisome to
all persons.”

ब्राह्मण उवाच
प्रत्यक्षं भवता YT! यद् दष्टं मम Ta
बलवानबलश्चेति वाच्यं ware विशेषणम्॥६४॥
त्वयोढा शिबिका चेति त्वय्यद्यापि च संस्थिता।
मिथ्यैतदत्र तु भवाञ्छृणोतु वचनं मम।।६५॥
भूमौ पादयुगस्यास्था जङ्घे पादद्वये स्थिते।
BR जङ्घाद्दयावस्थौ तदाधारं तथोदरम्॥। & &
वक्ष:स्थलं तथा बाहू स्कन्धौ चौदरसंस्थितौ।
स्कन्धाश्रितेयं शिबिका मम भारोऽत्र किंकृत:।। ६७॥
तत्र त्वमहमप्यत्र प्रोच्यते चेदमन्यथा।। ६ ८॥
अहं त्वञ्च तथान्ये च भूतैरुह्याम पार्थिव।
गुणप्रवाहपतिततो भूतवर्गोऽपि यात्ययम्।।६९॥
कर्मवश्या गुणाश्चैते सत्त्वाद्या: पृथिवीपते।
अविद्यासञ्चितं कर्म तच्चाशेषेषु जन्तुषु।॥ ७०॥
प्रवृद्धपचयौ नास्य एकस्याखिलजन्तुषु॥ ७ १॥
यदा नोपचयस्तस्य न चैवापचयो zu!
तदा पीवानसीतीत्यं कया युक्त्या त्वयेरितम्॥७२॥
भू-पाद-जङ्घा-कट्युरुजठरादिषु संस्थिते।
शिबिकेयं यथा Teel तथा भार: समस्त्वया॥७३॥
तदान्यैर्जन्तुभिर्भूप! शिबिकोढा न केवलम्।
शैल-डुम-गृहोत्योऽपि पृथिवीसम्भवोऽपि वा।।७४॥
यदा पुंस: पृथग्भाव: प्राकृतै: कारणैर्नृप!
Weary तदायास: कथं वा नृपते! मया।॥७५॥
यद्द्रव्या शिबिका चेयं तद्द्रव्यो भूतसङ्गह:।
भवतो मेऽखिलस्यास्य ममत्वेनोपबृंहित:॥७६॥

“First tell me,” said the Brahmana , ‘what it
is of me that you have clearly seen’, and then

211

you may distinguish my properties as strong or
weak. The asscrtion that you behold the
palankin borne by me, or placed on me, is
untrue. Listen, prince, to what I have to
remark. The place of both the feet is the
ground; the legs are supported by the feet; the
thighs rest upon the legs; and the belly reposes
on the thighs; the chest is supported by the
belly; and the arms and shoulders are propped
up by the chest; the palankin is borne upon the
shoulders, and how can it be considered as my
burden? This body which is seated in the
palankin is defined as You; thence what is
elsewhere called. This, is here distinguished as
I and You and others are constructcd of the
elements; and the elements, following the
stream of qualities, assume a bodily shape; but
qualities, such as goodness and the rest, are
dependant upon acts; and acts, accumulated in
ignorance, influence the condition of all
beings’’. The pure, imperishable soul, tranquil,
void of qualities, pre-eminent over nature
(Prakrti), is one, without increase or
diminution, in all bodics. But if it be equally
excmpt from increase or diminution, then with
what propriety can you say to me, ‘I see that
you are robust?’ If the palankin rests on the
shoulders, and they on the body; the body on
the feet, and the feet on the earth; then is the
burden borne as much by you as by me''.
When the nature of men is different, either in
its essence or its cause, then may it be said that
fatigue is to be undergone by me. That which
is the substance of the palankin is the
substance of you and me and all others, being
an aggregate of elements, aggregated by
individuality.”
पराशर उवाच

एवमुक्त्वाभवन्मौनी स वहञ्छिबिकां द्विज!

सोऽपि Usradrateat तत्पादौ जगृहे त्वरन्॥७७॥
राजोवाच

भो भो विसृज्य शिबिकां ware He मे द्विज!

कथ्यतां को भवानत्र जाल्मरूपधर: स्थित:।।७८॥
