90

पराशर उवाच
sya मैत्रेय गोविन्दं यथा पूर्वं प्रचेतस:।
: समुद्रसलिलेशया:।। २२॥

Parasara said— Hear, Maitreya, the hymn
which the Pracetasas, as they stood in the
waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their
nature being identified with him :

प्रचेतस ऊचु:
Wat: स्म सर्ववचसां प्रतिष्ठा यत्र wea
तमाद्यं तमशेषस्य जगत: परमं प्रभुम्। २३॥
ज्योतिराद्यमनौपम्यमनन्तरमपारवत्।
योनिभूतमशेषस्य स्थावरस्य चरस्य च।। २४॥
यस्याह: प्रथमं रूपमरूपस्य ततो निशा।
PRAT च परमेशस्य तस्मै कालात्मने नम:॥ २५॥
भुज्यतेऽनुदिनं ea: पितृभिश्च सुधात्मक:।
जीवभूत: समस्तस्य तस्मै सोमात्मने नम:।॥ २६॥
यस्तमो हन्ति तीव्रात्मा स्वभाभिर्भासयन् नभ:।
धर्मशीताम्भसां योनिस्तस्मै सूर्यात्मने नम:।। २७॥
काठिन्यवान् यो विभर्ति जगदेतदशेषत:।
शब्दादिसंश्रयो व्यापी तस्मै भूम्यात्मने TA VC
यद्योनिभूतं जगतो बीजं यत् सर्वदेहिनाम्।
WL तोयरूपमीशस्य नमामो हरिमेधस:॥ २९॥
यो मुखं सर्वदेवानां हव्यभुकु कव्यभुक तथा।
पितॄणाञ्च नमस्तस्मै विष्णवे पावकात्मने।॥ ३ MI
आकाशयोनिर्भगवान् AE वाटवात्मने नम:॥ ३ १॥
अवकाशमशेषाणां भूतानां य: प्रयच्छति।
अनन्तमूर्तिमान् शुद्धस्तस्मै व्योमात्मने TAZ २॥
समस्तेन्दियवर्गस्य य: `सदा स्थानमुत्तमम्।

Pracetasas said~ "We bow to him whose
glory is the perpetual theme of every speech;
him first, him last; the supreme lord of the
boundless world; who is primeval light: who is
without his like; indivisible and infinite; the
origin of all existent things, moveable or
stationary. To that supreme being who is one
with time, whose first forms, though he be

without form, are day and evening and night,
be adoration. Glory to him, the life of all

THE VISNU-PURANAM

living things, who is the same with the moon,
the receptacle of ambrosia, drunk daily by the
gods and progenitors: to him who is one with
the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain,
who dissipates the gloom, and illuminates the
sky with his radiance: to him who is one with
earth, all-pervading, and the asylum of smell
and other objects of sense, supporting, the
whole world by its solidity. We adore that
form of the deity Hari which is water, the
womb of the world, the seed of all living
beings. Glory to the mouth of the gods, the
eater of the Havya; to the eater of the Kavya,
the mouth of the progenitors; to Visnu, who is
identical with fire; to him who is one with air,
the origin of ether, existing as the five vital
airs in the body, causing constant vital action;
to him who is identical with the atmosphere,
pure, illimitable, shapeless, separating all
creatures. दॆ

TAH शब्दादिरूपाय नम: कृष्णाय वेधसे॥ ३ ३॥
गृह्णाति विषयान् नित्यमिन्दियात्माक्षराक्षर:।
यस्तस्तै ज्ञानमूलाय नता: स्मो हरिमेधसे॥ ३४॥

गृहीतानिन्दियैरर्थान् आत्मने य: प्रयच्छति।

अन्त: करणभूताय तस्मै विश्वात्मने नम:।। ३५॥

यस्मिन्ननन्ते सकलं विश्वं यस्मात् यथोद्गतम्।

लयस्थानञ्च यस्तस्मै नम: प्रकृतिधर्मिणे।। ३६॥

Ys: संलक्ष्यते wa गुणवानिव योऽगुण:।

तमात्मरूपिणं देवं नता: स्म पुरुषोत्तमम्॥३७॥

नता: स्म तत्परं ब्रह्म यद् विष्णो: परमं पदम्।। ३८॥

Glory to Krsna, who is Brahma in the form
of sesible objects, who is ever the direction of
the faculties of sense. We offer salutadon to '
that supreme Hari who is one with the senses,
both subtle and substantial, the recipient of all
impressions, the root of all knowledge: to the
universal soul, who, as internal intellect,
delivers the impressions, received by the
senses to soul: to him who has the properties
of Prakrti; in whom, without end, rest all
things; from whom all things proceed; and
who is that into which all things resolve. We
