310

offered him the customary libation and treated
him with the most profound respect. Having
taken a seat, Saubhari said to the Raja, “I have
determined to marry : do you, king, give me
one of your daughters as a wife : disappoint
not my affection. It is not the practice of the
princes of the race of Kakutstha to turn away
from compliance with the wishes of those who
come to them for succour. There are, O
monarch, other kings of the earth to whom
daughters have been born, but your family is
above all renowned for observance of
liberality in your donations to those who ask
your bounty. You have, O prince, fifty
daughters; give one of them to me, so that I
may be relieved from the anxiety I suffer
through fear that my suit may be denied."

WY उवाच

When Mandhaté heard this request and
looked upon the person of the sage, emaciated
by austerity and old age, he felt disposed to
refuse his consent; but dreading to incur the
anger and imprecation of the holy man, he was
much perplexed and declining his head, was
lost awhile in thought.

ऋॠषिरुवाच
ata! कस्मात् समुपैषि चिन्ता-
मशक्यमुक्तं न मयात्र किञ्चित्।
याऽवश्यदेया तनया तयैव
कृतार्थता नो यदि किं न लब्धम्।। २५॥

The Rsi, observing his hesitation, said, "On
what, O Raja, do you meditate? I have asked
for nothing which may not be readily accorded
: and what is there that shall be unattainable to
you, if my desires be gratified by the damsel
whom you must needs give to me?"

पराशर उवाच

अथ तस्य शापभीत: सप्रश्नयमुवाचासौ TM

THE VISNU-PURANAM

राजोवाच
way! अस्मत्कुलस्थितिरियम्,। य Wa कन्याया
अभिरुचितोऽभिजनवान् वर:, wat कन्या प्रदीयते।
TREE चास्मन्मनोरथानामप्यगोचरवर्तिनी कथमप्येषा
सञ्जाता। तदेवमवस्थिते न faa: fe at इति, तन्मया
चिन्त्यत इत्यभिहिते तेन भूभुजा मुनिरचिन्तयत्। अहो
अयमन्योऽस्मत्प्रत्याख्यानोपाय:। वृद्धोऽयमनभिमत: watt
किमुत कन्यानामिति अमुना सच्चिनत्यैवमभिहितम्।। २६॥
एवमस्तु own करिष्यामीति afer मान्धातार-
मुवाच।। २७॥
वर्षवर:॥ २८॥

To this, the king, apprehensive of his
displeasure, answered and said, "Grave sir, it
is the established usage of our house to wed

_ our daughters to such persons only as they

shall themselves select from suitors of fitting
rank; and since this your request is not yet
made known to my maidens, it is impossible
to say whether it may be equally agreeable to
them as it is to me. This is the occasion of my
perplexity and I am at a loss what to do." This
answer of the king was fully understood by the
Rsi, who said to himself, "This is merely a
device of the Rajd to evade compliance with
my suit ; he has reflected that I am an old man,
having no attractions for women and not likely
to be accepted by any of his daughters : even
be it so; 1 will be a match for him:" and he
then spoke aloud and said, "Since such is the
custom, mighty prince, give orders that I be
admitted into the interior of the place.

ae कन्यैव काचिन्मामभिलषति, तदाहं दारपरिग्रहं
करिष्यामीति। अन्यथा चैतदलमस्माकम् एतेनात्तीत-
कालारम्भेणेत्युक्त्वा विरराम।

Should any of the maidens your daughters
be willing to take me for a bridegroom, I will
have her for my bride; if no one be willing,
then let the blame attach alone to the years that
T have numbered." Having thus spoken, he was
silent.
