BOOK 1, CHAP. 7

39

the Brahmanda is less detailed. A span from the
thumb to the first finger is a Pradega; to the middle
finger, a Nila; to the third finger, a Gokarna; and to
the little finger, a Vitasti, which is equal to twelve
Angulas, or fingers, understanding — thereby,
according to the Vayu, a joint of the finger
( 3hyertealfT) ; according to other authorities, it is the
breadth of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The
Vayu, giving similar measurements upon the
authority of Manu (मनोर्धानि प्रमाणानि), although such a
statement does not occur in the Manu Sarhhita,
adds. that 21 fingers= 1 Ratni; 24 finger=1 Hasta, or
cubit; 2 Ratnis==] Kishku; 4 Hastas=1Dhanu; 2000
Dhanus= | Gavyiti; and 8000 Dhanus= | Yojana.
Durgas, or strongholds, are of four kinds; three of
which are natural. from their situation in
mountains, amidst water, or in other inaccessible
spots; the fourth is the artificial defences of a
village (Grama) a hamlet (Khetaka), or a city (Pura
or Nagara). which are severally half the size of the
next in the series. The best kind of city is one which
is about a mile long by half a mile broad, built in
the form of a parallelogram, facing the north-east,
and surrounded by a high wall and ditch. A hamlet
should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village
half a Yojana from a hamlet. The roads leading to
the cardinal points from a city should be twenty
Dhanus (above 100 feet) broad: a village road
should be the same: a boundary road ten Dhanus: a
royal or principal road or street should be ten
Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or branch
road should be four Dhanus. Lanes and paths
amongst the houses are two Dhanus in breadth:
footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house three
cubits: the private entrances and paths about the
mansion of still narrower dimensions. Such were
the measurements adopted by the first builders of
cities, according to the Puranas specified.

7. These are enumerated in the text, as well as io
the Vayu and Markandeya Purana, and are, Udara.
a sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus);
Kodrava (Paspalum kora): Cinaka, - a sort of panic
(P. miliaceum); Masa. Kidney bean (Phaseolus
radiatus);} Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); Masia,
lentil (Ervum hirsutum); Nispava, a sort of pulse:
Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus).
Cajan); Canaka. chick pea (Cicer arietinum); and
Sana (Crotolaria).

8. This allusion to the sects hostile to the Vedas,
Buddhists or Jains, does not occur in the parallel
passages of the Vayu and Markandeya Puranas.

. 9. The Vayu goes farther than this, and states
that castes were now first divided according to their
occupations : having, indeed, previously stated that
there was no such distinction in the Krta age:
वर्णाश्चमव्यवस्थाञ्च न तदासन्नं शंकर:। Brahma now
appointed those who were robust and violent to be
Ksatriyas, to protect the rest; those who were purc
and pious be made Brahmanas: those who were of
Jess power, but industrious, and addicted to
cultivate the ground, he made Vaisyas; whilst the
feeble and poor of spirit were constituted Stdras:
and he assigned them their several occupations, to
prevent that interference with one another which
had occurred as long as they recognised duties
peculiar to castes: @iutwitaat (प्रेजा:) ऽवरुध्यन्त
परस्परं।

10. These worlds, some of which will be more
particularly described in a different section. are the
seven Lokas or spheres above the earth:l.
Prajapatya or Pitri loka: 2. Indra loka or Swarga: 3.
Marutloka or Divaloka, heaven: 4. Gandharva loka,
the region of celestial spirits; also called
Maharloka- 5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints;
some copies read eighteen thousand; others, as in
the text, which is also the leading of the Padma
Purana: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages:
and, Brahmaloka or Satyaloka, the world of infinite
wisdom and truth. The eighth, or high world of
Visnu. विष्णो: परमं Wet is a sactarial addition, which in
the Bhagavata is called Vaikuntha. And in the
Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently, and
most certainly the last, modern inventions.

11. The divisions of Naraka, or hell, here named,
are again more particularly enumerated, b. 11. ८. 6.

Rea

Arhaki (Cytisus —
