138

THE VISNU-PURANAM

wears the pure soul of the world, undefiled and
void of qualities, as the Kaustubha gem. The
chief principle of things (Pradhdna) is seated
on the eternal, as the Srivatsa mark. Intellect
abides in Madhava, in the form of his mace.

भूतादिमिन्दियादिञ्च द्विधाहंकारमीश्वर:।

बिभर्ति शङ्खरूपेण शार्ङ्गरूपेण च स्थितम्।। ६९॥
बलस्वरूपमत्यन्तजवेनान्तरितानिलम्।
चक्रस्वरूपञ्च मनो धत्ते विष्णु: करे स्थितम्॥७०॥
UHI तु या माला वैजयन्ती गदाभृत:!

सा भूतहेतुसंघातो भूतमाला च वै द्विज।। ७ १॥
चानीन्दियाण्यशेषाणि बुद्धिकर्मात्मकानि a
शररूपाण्यशेषाणि तानि धत्ते जनार्दन:॥७२॥
बिभर्ति यच्चासिरत्नमच्युतोऽत्यन्तनिर्मलम्।
विद्यामयन्तु तज्ञानमविद्याकोशसंस्थितम्॥ ७ 3 tt
SU YOR WAS बुद्ध्यहङ्कारमेव च।

भूतानि च हृषीकेशे मन: सर्वेन्रियाणि च।
विद्याविद्ये च मैत्रेय सर्वमेतत् समाश्रितम्।।७४॥
अस्त्रभूषणसंस्थानस्वरूपं रूपवर्जित:।

बिभर्ति मायारूपोऽसौ श्रेयसे प्राणिनां हरि:।। ७५॥
बिभर्ति पुण्डरीकाक्षस्तदेवं परमेश्वर :।।७६॥

The lord (Iswara) supports egotism
(Ahamk4ra) in its twofold division, into
elements and organs of sense, in the emblems
of his conch-shell and his bow. In his hand Vis
nu holds, in the form of his discus, the mind,
whose thoughts (like the weapon) fly swifter
than the winds. The necklace of the deity
Vaijayanti, composed of five precious gems® is
the aggregate of the five elemental rudiments,
Janarddana bears, in his numerous shafts, the
faculties both of action and of perception. The
bright sword of Acyuta is holy wisdom,
concealed at some seasons in the scabbard of
ignorance. In this manner soul nature,
intellect, egotism, the elements. the senses,
mind ignorance, and wisdom, are all
assembled in the person of HrsikeSa. Hari, in a

delusive form embodies the
elements of the world, as his weapons and his

shapeless -

ornaments, for the salvation of mankind’.
Pundarikaksa, the lord of all, assumes nature,
with all its products, soul and all the world.

या विद्या या तथाऽविद्या यत् We यच्चासदव्ययम्।
aq सर्वं सर्वभूतेशे मैत्रेय मधुसूदने।। Vit
कालस्वरूपो भगवानपरो हरिरव्यय:।७८॥
भूर्लोकोऽथ Yara: स्वर्लोको मुनिसत्तम!
महर्जनस्तप: सत्यं सप्तलोका इमे विभु:॥७९॥
आधार: सर्वविद्यानां स्वयमेव हरि: स्थित:॥८०॥
देव-मानुष-पश्चादिस्वरूपैर्बहुभि: स्थित:।

तत: सर्वॆश्वरोऽनन्तो भूतमूर्तिरमूर्तिमान्॥ ८ १।
mat यजूंषि सामानि तथैवाथर्वणानि वै।

इतिहासोपवेदास्तु वेदान्तेषु तथोक्तय:॥ ८ २॥

All that is wisdom, all that is ignorance, all
that is, all that is not, all that is everlasting, is
centred in the destroyer of Madhu, the lord of
all creatures. The supreme, eternal Hari is
time, with its divisions of seconds, minutes,
days, months, seasons, and years: he is the
seven worlds, the earth, the sky. heaven, the
world of patriarchs, of sages, of saints, of
truth: whose form is all worlds; first-born
before all the first-born; the supporter of all
beings, himself self-sustained: who exists in
manifold forms', as gods, men, and animals;
and is thence the sovereign lord of all, eternal:
whose shape is all visible things; who is
without shape or form: who is celebrated in
the Vedanta as the Rk, Yajus. Sama. and
Atharva Vedas inspired history, and sacred
science.

वेदाङ्गानि समस्तानि मन्वादिगदितानि च।
शस्त्राण्यशेषाण्याख्यानान्यनुवाकाश्च ये क्वचित्।। ८ ३॥ `
काव्यालापाश्च ये केचिद् गीतकान्यखिलानि a
शब्दमूर्तिधरस्यैतद् वपुविष्णोर्महात्मन:॥ ८४॥

यानि triage यान्यत्रान्यत्र वा क्वचित्। .

सन्ति वै वस्तुजातानि तानि सर्वाणि तद्दपु:॥ ८५॥

The Vedas, and their divisions; the ins-
titutes of Manu and other lawgivers;
