328

THE VISNU-PURANAM

तस्यापि सुगन्धि:) ततश्चामर्ष:) तस्य महस्वान् ततो
विश्रुतवान्, ततो बृहद्बल:, योऽर्जुनतनयेनाभिमन्युना
भारतयुद्धे क्षयमनीयत।। ४८॥

We हीक्ष्वाकुभूपाला: प्राधान्येन मयोदिता:।

एतेषाञ्चरितं श्रृण्वन् सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते॥४९॥

इति विष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे age: अध्याय:।

The son of Kusa was Atithi; his son was
Nisadha; his son was Nala;'® his son was
Nabhas; his son was Pundarika; his son was
Ksemadhanvan; his son was Devanika; his son
was Ahinagu;"” his son was Paripatra; his son
was Dala;”’ his son was Chala;”! his son was
Uktha;” his son was Vajranabha: his son was
Sankhanabha;”? his son was Abhyutthitasva;*
his son was Viésvasaha;* his son was
Hiranyanabha, who was a pupil of the mighty
Yogi Jaimini and communicated the
knowledge of _ spiritual exercise to
Yajfiavalkya.”° The son of this saintly king
was Pusya; his son was Dhruvasandhi;”’ his
son was Sudarsana; his son was Agnivarna; his
son was Sighra; his son was Maru,” who
through the power of devotion (Yoga) is still
living in the village called Kalapa and in a
future age will be the restorer of the Ksatriya
race in the solar dynasty. Maru had a son
named Prasusruta; his son was Susandhi; his
son was Amarsa; his son was Mahasvat;”” his
son was Visrutavat;*? and his son was
Vrihadbala, who was killed in the great way
by Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna. These are
the most distinguished princes in the family of
Iksvaku : whoevcr listens to the account of
them will be purified from all his sins.”
NOTES

1. So the Ramayana, Sumati is called the
daughter of Aristanemi : the Mahabharata calls her
Saivya. The story of Sagara and his descendants is
told at length in the Ramayana, first book and in the
Mahabharata, Vana Parva, III. 106, et seq., as well
as in most of the Puranas.

2. 0 Paficajana : Brahma.

3. The Bhagavata has, for a Purana, some
curious remarks on this part of the story, flatly

denying its truth. न साधुर्वादो मुनिकोपभज्जिता Foayen set
सत्त्वधामनि। कथं तमोरोषमयं विभाव्यते जगत्पवित्रात्मनि खे
रजोभुव:। यस्येरिता सांख्यमयी दृढेहनौर्यतो मुमुक्षुस्तरते दुरत्ययं।
भवार्णवं मृत्युपथं विपश्चित: परात्मभूतस्य se पृथङ्गति:॥ "The
report is not true, that the sons of the king were
scorched by the wrath of the sage; for how can the
quality of darkness, made up of anger, exist in a
world-purifying nature, consisting of the quality of
goodness; the dust of earth, as it were, in the sky?
How should mental perturbation distract that sage,
who was on with the supreme and who has
promulgated that Safikhya philosophy, which is a
strong vessel, by which he who is desirous of
liberation passes over the dangerous ocean of the
world by the path of death?"

4, Sagara is still the name of the ocean and
especially of the Bay of Bengal, at the mouth of the
Ganges. On the shore of the island called by the
same name, tradition places a Kapilasrama or
hermitage of Kapila, which is still the scene of an
annual pilgrimage. Other legends assign a very
different situation for the abode of the ascetic or the
foot of the Himalaya, where the Ganges descends
to the plains. There would be no incompatibility,
however, in the two sites, could we imagine the
tradition referred to a period when the ocean
washed, as it appears once to have done, the base of
the Himalaya and Saugor (Sagara) was at Haridvar.

5. Or Khatvanga : Brahma and Hari Vamsa : but
this is apparent an error. See note 14.

6. Omitted : Matsya and Agni. Visruta : Linga.

7. Nabhin : Bhagavata.

8. Ayutayus : Vayu, Linga and Ktrma, Srautayu
: Agni, Ayutajit ; Brahma.

9, अक्षहृदयज्ञ: 'knowing the heart of the dice’. The
same epithet, as well as that of ‘friend of Nala’ is
given him in the Vayu, Bhagavata and Brahma
Puranas and in the Hari Varhga and leaves no doubt
of their referring to the hero of the story told in the
Mahabhdrata. Nala however, as we shall hereafter
see, is some twenty generations later than Rituparna
in the same family; and the Vayu therefore thinks it
necessary to observe that two Nalas are noticed in
the Puranas and the one here adverted to is the son
of Virasena; द्वाविति wg gad
वीरसेनात्मजश्चैष यश्चैक्ष्वाकुकुलोद्बह:॥ while the other belongs
to the family of Iksvaku. The same passage occurs
in the Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa; and the
commentator on the latter observes, निषधात्मजो नलो
