8

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Kala (time)'’, When discrete substance is
aggregated in crude nature, as in a foregone
dissolution, that dissolution is termed
elemental (Prakrta). The deity as Time is
without beginning, and his. end is not known;
and from him the revolutions of creation,
continuance, and dissolution unintermittingly
succeeds: (or when, in the latter season, the
equilibrium of the qualities (Pradhdna) exists,
and spirit (Puman) is detached from matter,
then the form of Visnu which is Time abide?".
Then the supreme Brahma, the supreme soul,
the substance of the world, the lord of all
creatures, the universal soul, the supreme
tuler, Hari, of his own will having entered into
matter and spirit, agitated the mutable and
immutable principles, the season of creation
being arrived, in the same manner as fragrance
affects the mind from its proximity merely,
and not from any immediate operation upon
mind itself: so the Supreme influenced the
elements of creation’. Purusottama is both the
agitator and the thing to be agitated; being
present in the essence of matter, both when it
is contracted and expanded”. Visnu, supreme
over the supreme, is of the nature of discrete
forms in the atomic productions, Brahma and
the rest (gods, men. etc.)

गुणसाम्यात् ततस्तस्मात् क्षेत्रज्ञाधिष्ठितान्मुने।
गुणव्यञ्जनसम्भूति: सर्गकाले द्विजोत्तम।। ३ ३॥

Then from that equilibrium of the qualities
(Pradhdna) presided over by soul”, proceeds
the unequal development of those qualities
(constituting the principle Mahat or Intellect)
at the time of creation”.

प्रथानतत्त्वमुद्धूतं महान्तं तत् समावृणोत्।
सात्विको राजसश्चैव तामसश्च त्रिधा महान्।
प्रधानतत्त्वेन समं त्वचा बीजमिवाव्रृतम्॥ ३४॥
वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च भूतादिश्चैव तामस:।
त्रिविधोऽयमहङ्कारो महत्तत्त्वादजायत।। ३५॥
भूतेन्द्रियाणां हेतु: स त्रिगुणत्वान्महामुने।

यथा प्रधानेन महान् महता स तथावृत:॥ ३ ६॥
भूतादिस्तु विकुर्वाण: शब्दतन्मात्रिकं तत:।

AA शब्दतन्मात्रादाकाशं शब्दलक्षणम्।
शब्दमात्रं तथाकाशं MAE: स समावृणोत्।। ३७॥

आकाशस्तु विकुर्वाण: स्पर्शमात्रं wast ह।

बलवानभवद् वायुस्तस्य स्पर्शो गुणो AA BSH

आकाशं शब्दमात्रन्तु स्पर्शमात्रं समावृणोत्।

The Chief principle then invests that Great
principle, Intellect, and it becomes three fold,
as affected by the quality of goodness,
foulness, or darkness, and invested by the
Chief principle (matter) as seed is by its skin.
From the Great principle (Mahat) Intellect.
threefold Egotism, (Ahankara)", denominated
Vaikarika. 'pure;' Taijasa, ‘passionate;, and
Bhutadi. rudimental.” is produced; the origin
of the (subtile) elements and of the organs of
sense; invested, in consequence of its three
qualities, by Intellect, as Intellect is by the
Chief principle. Elementary Egotism then
becoming productive, as the rudiment of
round, produced from it Ether, of which sound
is the characteristic, investing it with its
rudiment of sound. Ether becoming
productive, engendered the rudiment of touch;
whence originated strong wind. the property of
which is touch; and Ether, with the rudiment
of sound, enveloped the rudiment of touch.

ततो वायुर्विकुर्वाणो रूपमात्रं ससर्ज ह॥३९॥
ज्योतिरुत्पद्यते वायोस्तद्रूपगुणमुच्यते।
स्पर्शमात्रन्तु वै ary रूपमात्रं समावृणोत्।।४०॥
ज्योतिश्चापि fagneatat रसमात्रं ससर्ज ह।
सम्भवन्ति ततोऽभ्भांसि रसाधाराणि तानि च।। ४१॥
रसमात्राणि चाम्भांसि रूपमात्रं argue
विकुर्वाणानि चाम्भांसि गन्धमात्रं ससर्जिरे॥४२॥
संघातो जायते तस्मात् तस्य गन्धो गुणो मत:।
तस्मिंस्तस्मिंस्तु तन्मात्रा तेन तन्मात्रता स्मृता।। ४३॥
तन्मात्राण्यविशेषाणि अविशेषास्ततो fe ते।
न शान्ता नापि घोरास्ते न मूढाश्चाविशेषणा॥४४॥
भूततन्मात्रसर्गोऽयमहङ्कारात् तु तामसात्।
तैजसानीन्दियाण्याहुर्देवा वैकारिका SMS GH

एकादश भनश्चात्र देवा वैकारिका: स्मृता:।
