BOOK IV, 13

363

its being in my _ possession." 10० this

. Satadhanwan agreed and Akrira took the

_ jewel; and other former mounting a very swift
mare, one that could travel a hundred leagues

बलविशातनेन अतिगुस्वेरिंबारणाकषक्खि महिपोरुप्तोरेण a day, fled from Dvaraka. When Krsna heard

सीरिणा च We सकलजगद्वन्द्यानाममरवराणामपि योद्धुं
समर्थ:, किंपुताहम्। : शरणमभिलघ्यताम्।।४१॥

जग्राह।।४२॥
युक्तरथावस्थितौ बलदेव वासुदेवौ तमनुप्रयातौ॥४३॥

Being thus excited by his __ brother,
Balardéma engaged resolutely in the enterprise;
but Satadhanvan, being aware of their hostile
designs, repaired to Krtavarman and required
his assistance. Krtavarman, however, declined
to assist him, pleading his inability to engage
in a conflict with both Baladeva and Krsna,
Satadhanwan thus disappointed, applied to
Akrtra; but he said, "You must have recourse
to some other protector. How should I be able
to defend you? Thcre is no one even amongst
the immortals, whose praises are celebrated
throughout the universe, who is capable of
contending with the wielder of the discus, at
the stamp of whose foot the three worlds
tremble; whose hand makcs the wives of the
Asuras widows, whose weapons no _ host,
however mighty, can resist : no one is capable
of encountering the wielder of the
ploughshare, who annihilates the prowess of
his enemies by the glances of his eyes, that roll
with the joys of wine; and whose vast
ploughshare manifests his might, by seizing
and exterminating the most formidable foes."
"Since this is the case," replied Satadhanvan,
"and you are unable to assist me, at least
accept and take care of this jewel." "I will do
so," answered Akrtra, "if you promise that
even in the last extremity you will not divulge

of Satadhanvan's flight, he harness his four
horses, Saivya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa and
Balahaka, to his car and accompanied by
Balarama, set off in pursuit.

सा च asa शतयोजनप्रमाणं मार्गमतीत्य पुनरपि

\ बाह्यमाना मिथिलावनोद्देशे wonqerad शतधनुरपि at

परित्यज्य पदातिरेवाद्रवत्।।४४॥

कृष्णोऽपि बलभद्रमाह-तावदत्रैव स्यन्दने भवता स्थेयम्।
अहपेनमधपाचारपदातिरैवपदातिमनुगप्ययावद्घातयामि।
aa हि wm दृष्टदोषा हया: नैतिऽश्वा wart
भूमिभागमुल्लइग्र्यनैया.॥४५॥

तथेत्युक्त्वा बलभद्रो रथ wa तस्थौ। कृष्णोऽपि
farm भूमिभागमनुसृत्य दूरस्थस्यैव wh क्षिफ्चा
wee: शिरश्चिच्छेद तच्छरीराम्बरादिषु
बहुप्रकारमन्विष्यन्नपि word मणि नावाप यदा,
तदोपगम्य बलभद्रमाह,- व्रृथैवास्माभिर्घातित: शतधनु: न
प्राप्तमखिलजगत्सारभूतं तन्मणिरत्नम्। इत्याकर्ण्य उद्भूतकोपो
बलदेवो वासुदेवमाह, -धिकू त्वां यस्त्वमर्थलिप्सु:। war ते
भ्रातृत्वान्मर्षये तदयं पन्था:, स्वेच्छया way, न मे
meq, न wa, न wa: कार्यम्।
अलमेभिर्ममाग्रतोऽलीकशपथै:। seer तं तथा
प्रसाद्यमानोऽपि न तस्थौ, विदेहपुरीं प्रविवेश।। ४६॥
जनकश्चार्ध्यपूर्वकमेवैनं गृहं प्रेवशयामास। स तत्रैव त
तस्थौ। वासुदेवोऽपि द्वारकामाजगाम। यावच्च जनकराजगृहे
बलभद्रोऽवतस्थे) WAL MATEY दुर्योधनस्तत्सकाशाद्
गदाशिक्षामशिक्षत।। ४७॥

वर्षत्रयान्ते च बभ्रूग्रसेनप्रभूतिभियर्यादवैर्न तद्रत्नं
सम्प्रत्याय्य द्वारकामानीत:।।४८॥

The mare held her speed and accomplished
her hundred leagues; but when she reached the
country of Mithila, her strength was exhausted
and she dropped down and_ died.
Satadhanwan'' dismounting, continued his
flight on foot. When his pursuers came to the
