456

THE VISNU-PURANAM

increasing from its commencement till it ends
in dissolution. From his torn lips the demon
vomited foam and blood; his eyes rolled in
agony; his joints gave way; he beat the earth
with his feet; his body was covered with
perspiration; he became incapable of any
effort. The formidable demon, having his
mouth rent open by the arm of Krsna, fell
down, torn asunder like a tree struck by
lightning: he lay separated into two portions,
each having two legs, half a back, half a tail,
one ear, one, eye, and one nostril. Krsna stood,
unharmed and smiling, after the destruction of
the demon, surrounded by the cow-herds, who,
together with their women, were filled with
astonishment at the death of Kesin, and
glorified the amiable god with the lotus eyes.

अथाहान्तरितो fast नारदो जलदे स्थित:।

केशिनं fed aver हर्षनिर्भरमानस:॥ १८॥

साधु Ag जगन्नाथ लीलयैव यदच्युत।

निहतोऽयं त्वया केशी क्लेशदस्तिदिवौकसाम्।। १९॥

युद्धोत्सुकोऽहमत्यर्थं नरवाजि-महाहवम्।

अभूतपूर्वमन्यत्र द्रष्टुं स्वर्गादुपाग्रत:।। २०॥

कर्म्मण्यत्रावतारे ते कृतानि मधुसूदन।

यानि तैर्विस्मितं चेतस्तोषमेतेन मे गतम्॥। २१॥

तुरङ्गस्यास्य शक्रोऽपि कृष्ण! देवाश्च विभ्यति।

ध्रुतकेशलजालस्य ह्रेषतोऽभ्रावलोकिन:॥ २ २॥

यस्मात् त्वयैव दुष्टात्मा हत: केशी BATE

WEIL केशवनाम्ना त्वं लोके गेयो भविष्यसि।। २३॥

Narada the Brahman, invisible, seated in a

cloud, beheld the fall of Kegin, and delightedly
exclaimed, "Well done, lord of the universe,
who in thy spores hast destroyed Kesin, the
oppressor of the denizens of heaven! Curious
to behold this great combat between a man and
a horse—such a one as was never before heard
of-I have come from heaven. Wonderful are
the works that you hast done, in thy descent
upon the earth ! they have excited my

astonishment; but this, above all, has given me
pleasure. Indra and the gods lived in dread of

this horse, who tossed his mane, and neighed,
and looked down upon the clouds. For this,
that you hast slain the impious Kesin, you
shalt be known in the world by the name of,
KeSgava,’

स्वस्तस्तु ते गमिष्यामि कंसयुद्धेऽपुना पुन:.
षरश्वोऽहं समेष्यामि त्वाय केशिनिसूदन।। २४॥
उग्रसेनसुते aa सानगे विनिपातिते।
भारावतारकर्तता त्वं पृथिव्या: पृथिवीधर।। २५॥
तत्रानेकप्रकाराणि युद्धानि पृथिवीक्षिताम्।

द्रष्टव्यानि मया युस्मत्प्रणीतानि जनार्द्दन।। २६॥
सोऽहं यास्यामि were! देवकार्य महत् कृतम्।
त्वया सभाजितश्चायं स्वस्ति तेऽस्तु व्रजाम्यहम्।। २७॥

Farewell: I will now depart. I shall meet
you again, conqueror of Kesin, in two days
more, in conflict with Karisa. When the son of
Ugrasena, with his followers, shall have been
slain, then, upholder of the earth, will earth's
burdens have been lightened by you. Many are
the battles of the kings that I have to see, in
which you shall be renowned. I will now
depart, Govinda. A great deed, and acceptable
to the gods, has been done by you. I have been
much delighted with you, and now take my
leave.”

पराशर उवाच
नारदे तु गते कृष्ण: सह गोपैरविस्मित:।
विवेश गोकुलं गोपी-नेत्रपानैकभाजनम्।। २८॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे षोडश: अध्याय:।।
When Narada had gone, Krsna, not in any
way surprised, returned with the Gopas to

Gokula; the sole object of the eyes or the

women of Vraja.°
kh

NOTES

1 As Virabhadra did to PisI or Pisan, a form of
Strya, at the sacrifice of Daksa: see Bk. ] Ch. VIII.
n. 6.

2. Or Kesi and va. ‘who kills,’ from vadh or
badh, ‘to kill:’ but this is a Pauranik etymology, and
