384

THE VISNU-PURANAM

44, Riksa : Vayu. Prthu :
Bhagavata, Omitted : Brahma.

45. Bahydsva : Agni. Bhadrasva :
Bharmyasva : Bhagavata.

46. Jaya : Matsya. Sanjaya : Bhagavata.

47, Yavinara ; Agni and Bhagavata, Javinara ;
Matsya.

48. Kapila : Matsya. Krmilasgva : Brahma.

49. Paficdla was at first the country north and
west of Delhi, between the foot of the Himalaya
and the Cambal. It was afterwards divided into
northern and southern Paficdla, separated by the
Ganges. Makandi on the Ganges and Kampilya
were the chief cities of the latter; Ahiksetra in the
former. The Paficdlas; according to the
Mahabharata, expelled Samvarana from
Hastindpur, but it was recovered by Kuru. The
purpose of the term P4ficala is similarly explained
in other Puranas. In the Mahabharata they are the
grandsons of Ajamidha.

50. The Matsya says that they, as well as the
Kanvas, were all followers or partisans of Angiras :
मु : क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातय: एतेह्यङ्गिरस: पक्षे संस्थिता
कण्वमुद्ला:। The Hari Varhsa has nearly the same
words,

51. Bhadrayagva : Vayu. Paricdsva : Agni.
Bandhyasva : Matsya. Bharmya : Bhagavata. But
there is some indistinctness as to his descent. The
Matsya and Hari Varhsa give the son of Mudgala
only his patronymic Maudgalya. According to the
first, his son was Indrasena; and his son,
Bandhyasva. The second makes Badhryasva the
son of Maudgalya by Indrasena. The Bhagavata
makes Bharmya, the patronymic of Mudgala, the
son of Bharmydsva and who is the father of
Divodisa and Ahalya : मिथुनं मुद्गलाद्भाम्म्या द्विवोदास:
पुमामभूत्। The commentator has, Wahl भरम्म्याश्चपुत्रात्।

52. In the Ramayana, Satdnanda appears as the
family priest of Janaka, the father of Sita,

53. From whom the Maitreya Brahmanas were
descended : Hari Varhsa, In the Matsya and Agni
the son of Mitrayu is called Maitreya (Bk. I. Ch. I).
The Brahma Purana and Hari Varga here close the
lineage of Divodasa : the Agni adds but one name,
Som4pi. They then proceed with the descendants of
Srfijaya, one of the Paficdlas or Paficadhanus,
Somadatta, Sahadeva and then as in our text. The
Vayu and Bhagavata agree with the latter in making
the line continuous from Divodasa. According to

Matsya. Arka ;

Matsya

the Matsya and Brahma Purana the race of
Ajamtdha became extinct in the person of
Sahadeva, but Ajamidha was thence called. the
Somaka family. It was in the reign of Drupada that
the possessions of the Paficilas were divided;
Drona, assisted by the Pandavas, conquering the
country and proceeding the southern portion again
to Drupada, as related in the Mahabh4rata. The two
princes last named in the list figure in the great war.
54. The Hari Varhsa gives him two brothers,
Dhimravarna and Sudargana. In the Mahabharata
one list agrees with the text; the other calls
Samvarana the son of Ajamidha by his wife Riksa.
55. One other is named in the Bhagavata,
Matsya, Brahma and Agni; Animejaya,
Arimarddana and Nisadhasva. The Hari Vamésa has
Sudhanvat in place of Jahnu; having also Sudhanus.
56. Krta : Vayu. Krtayajiia : Brahma. Krmi :
Matsya, Krti : Bhagavata.
57. The story of Uparicara or a Vasu who by
command of Indra became king of Cedi, is told in
the Mahabharata, Adi Parvan. He is there said to

: have at first five sons, Vrhadratha, king of

Magadha, Pratyagra, Kusamba, also called
Manivahana, Mavella and Yadu, by his wife
Girika; afterwards he has, by Adrika, an Apsaras
condemned to the form of a fish, Matsya a son and
Satyavati or Kali a daughter : the latter was the
mother of Vy4sa. The same legend is referred to in
the accounts of Uparicara and his family in the
Bhagavata, Matsya, Hari Varhga, etc.

58. Vrsabha : Matsya.

59. Satyajita : Vayu. Satyahita ;
Satyadhrtra or Pusya : Matsya.

60. This story is told in the 16th section of the
Sabha Parvan of the Mahabharata, where also he is
called the son of Vrhadratha. In the Vayu he is the
son of Satyajita. The Agni has Satyahita, Urijja,

Bhagavata.

Sambhava, Jarasandha; and the Matsya,
Satyadhrita, | Dhanusa, Sarva, Sambhava,
Jarasandha.

61. Somadhi ; Vayu. Udipa : Agni. Udayus :

Brahma. Somavit : Matsya.
62. Srutakarman : Agni. Srutasarman : Brahma.
week
