BOOK IV, 5

333

इत्येते मैथिला:। med एतेषामात्मविद्याश्रयिणो
OTT भविष्यन्तीति।। १४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे पञ्चम: SATA: II

The son of Bhanumat was Satadyumna; his
son was Suci; his son was Urjjavaha; his son
was Satyadhvaja; his son was Kuni;’ his son
was Anjana; his son was Rtujit; his son was
Aristanemi®: his son was Srutayus; his son was
Sup4rsva; his son was Safijaya’; his son was
Ksemari'®: his son was Anenas'': his son was
Minaratha”’; his son was Satyaratha; his son
Satyarathi?; his son was Upagu"; his son was
Sruta!®; his son was Sdsvata'®; his son was
Sudhanvan; his son was Subhasa; his son was
Susruta'’; his son was Jaya; his son was
Vijaya; his son was Rita; his son was
Sunaya'*; his son was Vitahavya; his son was
Dhrti; his son was Bahuladsva; his son was
Krti, with whom terminated the family of
Janaka. These are the kings of Mithila, who
for the most part will be’? proficient in

spiritual knowledge””.

KE

NOTES

1. None of the authorities, except the Vayu and
Bhagavata, contain the series of kings noticed in
this chapter.

2. This shows that the Hindus were not
unacquainted with the Egyptian art of embalming
dead bodies. In the Kasi Khanda, s. 30, an account
is given of a Brahmana who carries his mother's
bones or rather her corpse, from Setubandha or
Rameswara to Kasi. For this purpose he first
washed it with the five excretions of a cow and the
five pure fluids or milk, curds, ghee, honey and
sugar. He then embalms it with Yaksakarddama, a
composition of Agallochum, camphor, musk,
saffron, sandal and a resin called Kakkola; and
envelopes it severally with Netravastra, flowered
muslin; Pattamvara, silk; Surasavastra, coarse
cotton; Manjistha, cloth dyed with madder; and
Nepala Kambala, Nepal blanketing. He then covers
it with pure clay and puts the whole into a coffin of
copper. Tamra samputa. These practices are not
only unknown, but would be thought impure in the
present day.

3. These legends are intended to explain and
were probably suggested by, the terms Vaideha and
Mithila, applied to the country upon the Gandaka
and Kosi rivers, the modern Tirhut. The Ramayana
places a prince named Mithi between Nimi and
Janaka, when comes the name Mithil4. In other
respects the list of kings of Mithila agrees, except
in a few names. Janaka the successor of Nimi is
different from Janaka who is celebrated as the
father of Sita. One of them, which, does not appear,
is also renowned as a philosopher and patron of
philosophical teachers. Mahabharata, Moksa
dharma. According to the Vayu Purana, Nimi
founded a city called Jayantapur, near the Asrama
of Gautama. The remains of a city called Janakpur,
on the northern skirts of the district, are supposed
to indicate the site of a city founded by one of the
princes so named.

4. This identifies Siradhvaja with the second
Janaka, the father-in-law of Rama. The story of Sita
birth or rather discovery, is narrated in the Aranya
Khanda of the Ramayana, the Vana Parva of the
Mahabharata and in the Vayu, Brahma Vaivartta,
K&lika and other Puranas.

5. The Ramayana says, 'of Sankasya', which is
no doubt the correct reading. Fa Hian found the
kingdom of Sang-kiashi in the Doab, about
Mainpuri. Account of the Foe-Kue-ki. The
Bhagavata makes Kusadhvaja the son of
Siradhvaja.

6. The Bhagavata differs from our authority here
considerably, by inserting several princes between
KuSadhvaja and Bhanumat; or Dharmadhvaja, who
has two sons, Krtadhvaja and Khandikya; the
former is the father of Kesidhvaja, the latter of
Bhanumat. See the last book of the Visnu.

7. Sakuni and the last of the series, according to
the Vayu.

8. Between this prince and Suci the series of the
Bhagavata is Sanadhvaja, Urdhvaketu, Aja, Purujit.
The following variations are from the same
authority.

9. Citraratha.

10. Ksemadhi.

11. Omitted.

12. Samaratha.

13. Omitted.

14. Upaguru.

15. Upagupta.
