76

उन्मीलिताक्षो ददृशे ध्यानदृष्टं aft पुर:।।४४॥
शङ्खचक्रगदाशार्ङ्गवरासिधरमच्युतम्।

किरीटिनं समालोक्य जगाम शिरसा महीम्।।४५॥
रोमाञ्चिताङ्ग: सहसा साध्वसं परमं गत:।

स्तवाय देवदेवस्य स चक्रे मानसं gaz ve i
किं वदामि स्तुतावस्य केनोक्तेनास्य संस्तुति:।
इत्याकुलमतिर्देवं तमेव शरणं TA vil

The boy, hearing these words of the god of
gods, opened his eyes, and beholding that Hari
whom he had before seen in his meditations
actually in his presence, bearing in his hands
the shell, the discus, the mace, the bow, and
scimetar, and crowned with a diadem, he
bowed his head down to earth; the hair stood
erect on his brow, and his heart was depressed
with awe. He reflected how best he should
offer thanks to the god of gods; what he could
say in his adoration; what words were capable
of expressing his praise: and _ being
overwhelmed with perplexity, he had recourse
for consolation to the deity.

ga sara
भगवन् यदि मे तोषं तपसा परमं गत:।
स्तोतुं तदहमिच्छामि वरमेतं प्रयच्छ Ave
ब्रह्माद्यैर्वेदवेदज्ञैर्जायते यस्य नो गति:।
तं त्वां कथमहं देव स्तोतुं शक्नोमि बालक:॥४९॥
त्वद्भक्तिप्रवणं ह्येतत् परमेश्वर मे मन:।
स्तोतुं प्रवृत्तं त्वत्पादौ तत्र WaT प्रयच्छ ANY of

Dhruva exclaimed—“If the lord is contented
with my devotions, let this be my reward, that
I may know how to praise him as I wish. How
can IJ, a child, pronounce his praises, whose
abode is unknown to Brahma and to others
learned in the Vedas? My heart is overflowing
with devotion to you: oh lord, grant me the
faculty worthily to lay mine adorations act
your feet.”

पराशर उवाच
शङ्खप्रान्तेन गोविन्दस्तं पस्पर्श कृताञ्जलिम्।
उत्तानपादतनयं द्विजवर्य्य जगत्पति:।। ५ १॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अथ प्रसन्नवदनस्तत्क्षणान्नृपनन्दन:।
तुष्टाव प्रणतो भूत्वा भूतधातारमच्युतम्।। ५ २॥

Whilst lowly bowing, with his hands
uplifted to his forehead, Govinda, the lord of
the world, touched the son of Uttanapada with
the tip of his conch-shell, and immediately the
royal youth, with a countenance sparkling with
delight, praised respectfully the impcrishable
protector of living beings.
qa उवाच

भूमिरापोऽनलो वायु: खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च।
भूतादिरादिप्रकृतिर्यस्य रूपं नतोऽस्ति तम्॥ ५ ३॥
Wa: सूक्ष्मोऽखिलव्यापी प्रधानात् परत: पुमान्।
यस्य रूपं नमस्तस्मै पुरुषाय गुणाशिने।५४॥
भूरादीनां समस्तानां गन्धादीनाञ्च शाश्वत:।
FATS प्रधानस्य पुरुषस्य च य: पर:।।५५॥

तं ब्रह्मभूतमात्मानमशेषजगत: परम्।

प्रपद्ये शरणं शुद्धं ARE परमेश्वरम्।॥ ५६॥

तस्मै नमस्ते सर्वात्मन् योगिचिन्त्याविकारवत्।। ५७॥

Dhruva exclaimed— “I venerate him, whose
forms are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intellect, the first element (Ahankara),
primeval nature, and the pure, subtile, all-
pervading soul, that surpasses nature.
Salutation to that spirit that is void of
qualities; that is supreme over all the elements
and all the objects of sense, over intellect, over
nature and spirit. I have taken refuge with that
pure form of thine, oh supreme, which is one
with Brahma, which is spirit, which transcends
all the world. Salutation to that form which,
pervading and supporting all, is designated
Brahman, unchangeable, and contemplated by
religious sages.

सहस्रशीर्षा Yar सहस्राक्ष: सहस्रपात्।

सर्वव्यापी Ya: स्पर्शादत्यतिष्ठद् TMT ५८॥
यद्धूतं aa वै भाव्यं पुरुषोत्तम तद् भवान्।

त्वत्तो fare स्वराटू WHS त्वत्तश्चाप्यधिपुरुष:॥५९॥
अत्यरिच्यत सोऽधश्च frig चोर्ध्वञ्च वै भुव:।
