BOOK III, CHAP. 7

As the young Sala tree by its beauty
declares the excellence of the juice which it
has imbibed from the earth, so when the
eternal has taken up his abode in the bosom of
any one, that men is lovely amidst the beings
of this world. Depart, my servant, quickly
from those men whose sins have been
dispersed by moral and religious merit,” whose
minds are daily dedicated to the imperceptible
deity and who are exempt from pride,
uncharitableness and malice.

gfe afe भगवाननादिरास्ते
हरिरसिशङ्खगदाधरोऽव्ययात्मा।
तदघमघविघातकर्तृभिन्नं
wale कथं सति चान्धकारमर्के।। २७॥

In the heart in which the divine Hari, who
is without beginning or end, abides, armed
with a sword, a shell and a mace, sin cannot
remain; for it cannot coexist with that which
destroys it, as darkness cannot continue in the
world when the sun is shining.

हरति परधनं निहन्ति जन्तून्
वदति तथानृतनिष्ठुराणि यश्च।
कलुषमतेर्हृदि तस्य नास्त्यनन्त:।। २८॥
न सा + विनिन्दां
कलुषमति: कुरुते सतामसाधु:।
न यजति न ददाति यश्च Wat
मनसि न तस्य जनार्दनोऽधमस्य।। २९॥

The eternal makes not his abode in the
heart of that man who covets another's wealth,
who injures living creatures, who speaks
harshness and untruth, who is proud of his
inequity and whose mind is evil. Janardana
occupies not his thoughts who envies another's
prosperity, who calumniates the virtuous, who
never sacrifices nor bestows gifts upon the
pious, who is blinded by the property of
darkness.

परमसुहृदि बान्धवे कलत्रे

सुततनयापितृभरृमातृत्यवर्गे।

247

शठमतिरुपयाति योऽर्थतृष्णां
तमधमचेष्टमवैहि AT भक्तम्।। ३ ०॥
सततमनार्य्यविशालसङ्गमत्त:।
अनुदिनकृतपापबनखधयत्न:
पुरुषपशुर्नहि वासुदेवभक्त:।। ३ १॥

That vile wretch is no worshipper of Visnu,
who through avarice is unkind to his nearest
friends and relations, to his wife, children,
parents and dependants.’ The brute-like man
whose thoughts are evil, who is addicted to
unrighteous acts, who ever seeks the society of
the wicked and suffers no day to pass without
the perpetration of crime, is no worshipper of
Vasudeva.

सकलमिदमहञ्च वासुदेव:

परमपुमान् परमेश्वर: स एक:।
इति मतिश्चला भवत्यनन्ते

हृदयगते Sa तान् विहाय दूरात्॥३ २॥
कमलनयन वासुदेव विष्णो

धरणिधराच्युत
wa शरणमितीरयन्ति ये a

त्यज भट दूरतरेण तानपापान्॥३ ३॥
वसति मनसि यस्य सोऽव्ययात्मा

पुरुषवरस्य न तस्य दृष्टिपाते।
wa गतिरथवा ममास्ति चक्र-

प्रतिहतवीर्य्यबलस्य सोऽन्यलोक्य:।॥ ३४॥

Do you proceed afar off from those in
whose hearts Ananta is enshrined; from him
whose sanctified understanding conceives the
supreme male and ruler, Vasudeva, as one
with his votary and with all this world. Avoid
those holy persons who are constantly
invoking the lotus-eyed Vasudeva, Visnu, the
supporter of the earth, the immortal wielder of
the discus and the shell, the asylum of the
world. Come not into the sight of him in
whose heart the imperishable soul resides, for
he is defended from my power by the discus of
his deity; he is designed for another world (for
the heaven of Visnu).'
