BOOK I, CHAP. 13

83

the property of their neighbours. The great
dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is
raised by troops of clustering robbers,
hastening to fall upon their prey.” The sages,
hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed
the thigh of the king, who had left no
offspring, to produce a son. From the thigh,
thus nibbled, came forth a being of the
complexion of a charred stake, with flattened
features (like a Negro), and of dwarfish
statute. “What am | to do?” cried he eagerly to
the Munis, "Sit down" (Nishida), said they;
and thence his name was Nishada. His
descendants, the inhabitants of the Vindhya
mountain, great Muni. are still called Nis
hadas. and are characterized by the exterior
tokens of depravity’, By this means the
wickedness of Vena was expelled; those
Nisadas being born of his sins, and carrying
them away. The Brahmanas then proceeded to
rub the right arm of the king, from which
friction was engendered the illustrious son of
Vena, named Prthu, resplendent in person, as
it the blazing deity of Fire had been
manifested.

आद्यमाजगवं नाम खात् पपात ततो धनु:॥ ३ ९॥
शराश्च दिव्या नभस: कवचञ्च पपात ह।

तस्मिन् जाते तु भूतानि सम्प्रहष्टानि सर्वश:॥४०॥
सत्पुत्रेण च जातेन वेणोऽपि त्रिदिवं ययौ।
पुन्नाम्नो नरकात् AT: स त्तेन सुमहात्मना।।४१॥
तं समुद्राश्च नद्यश्च रत्नान्यादाय सर्वश:।

तोयानि चाभिषेकार्थं सर्वाण्योवोपतस्थिरे॥ ४२॥
पितामहश्च भगवान् देवैराङ्गिरसै: सह।
स्थावराणि च भूतानि जंगमोनि च सर्वश:।॥४३॥
समागम्य तदा वैण्यमभ्यषिञ्चन् नराधिपम्।

eet तु दक्षिणो चक्रं दृष्टा तस्य पितामह:॥४४॥
विष्णुचिह्नं at चक्रं सर्वेषां चक्रवर्तिनाम्।।४५॥
भवत्यव्याहतो यस्य प्रभावस्त्रिदशैरपि।

There then fell from the sky the primitive
bow (of Mahddeva) named Ajagava. and
celestial arrows, and panoply from heaven. At

the birth of Prthu all living creatures rejoiced;
and Vena, delivered by his being born from
the hell named Put, ascended to the realms
above. The seas and rivers, bringing Jewels
from their depths, and water to perform the
ablutions of his installation, appeared. The
great parent of all, Brahma, with the gods and
the descendants of Angiras (the fires), and
with all things animate or inanimate,
assembled and performed the ceremony of
consecrating the son of Vena. Beholding in his
right hand the (mark of the) discus of Visnu,
Brahma recognised a portion of that divinity in
Prthu, and was much pleased; for the mark of
Visnu's discus is visible in the hand of one
who is born to be a universal emperor’, one
whose power is invincible even by the gods.

महता राजराज्येन पृथुर्वैण्य: प्रतापवान्।।४६॥
सोऽभिषिक्तो महातेजा विधिवद्धर्मकोविदै:।

पित्रा परञ्जितास्तस्य प्रजास्तेनानुरञ्जिता:।।४७॥
अनुरागात ततस्तस्य नाम राजेत्यजायत।
आपस्तस्तम्भिरे चास्य समुद्रमभियास्यत:।॥४८॥
पर्वताश्च ददुर्मागं ध्वजभङ्गश्च नाभवत्।

अकृष्टपच्या पृथिवी सिद्ध्यन्त्यन्नानि fasta xe i
सर्वकामदुधा गाव: पुटके पुटके मधु।

तस्य वै जातमात्रस्य यज्ञे पैतामहे FANG ol
Ga: सूत्यां समुत्पन्न: सौत्येऽहनि महामति:।
तस्मिन्नेव महायज्ञे जज्ञे प्राज्ञोऽथ मागध:॥ ५ १॥
प्रोक्तौ तदा मुनिवरैस्तावुभौ सुतमागधौ।

स्तूयतामेष नृपति: पृथुर्वैण्य: प्रतापवान्।॥५२॥
कर्मैपदनुरूपं वां we स्तोत्रस्य चाप्ययम्।
ततस्तावूचतुर्विप्रान् Waa कृताञ्जली।। ५३॥
अद्य जातस्य नो कर्म ज्ञायतेऽस्य महीपते:।

गुणा न चास्य ज्ञायन्ते न चास्य प्रथितं यश:।
स्तोत्रं किमाश्रयञ्चास्य कार्यमस्माभिरुच्यताम्।। ५४॥

The mighty Prthu, the son of Vena, being
thus invested with universal dominion by
those who were skilled in the rite, soon
removed the grievances of the people whom
his father had oppressed, and from winning
