158

THE VISNU-PURANAM

mountain and the Narmadé river. These
circumstances make it likely that the Payin Ganga
is the river in question.

12. The Deva or Goggra,

13. Both these are from the Paripatra range. In
some MSS. the latter is read Vedasini and Vetasini.
In the Ramayana occur Vedi and Vedavainasika,
which may be the same, as they seem to be in the
direction of the Sone. One of them may be the Beos
of eastern Malwa, but it rises in the Rksa mountain.

14. From Paripatra, Kiirma; from Mahendra,
Vayu.

15. One copy has Iksumélimi; two others, Iksula
and Krimi: one MS. of the Vayu has an Iksula from
Mahendra: the Matsya has Iksuda; Wilford's list has
Draksala,

16, Of these rivers, the two first are named in the
Padma P., but not in the Vayu, &c. The Gomati in
Oude, the Gandak, and the Kosi are well known.
The Dhutapapd is said to rise in the Himalaya.

17, In different MSS. read Michitaé and Nisrta. In
the Vayu and Matsya. NischirA or Nirvird is said to
flow from the Himalaya.

18. Also Lohatarani and Lohacharini.

19, The Saraya or Sarju is commonly identified
with the Deva. Wilford says it is so by the
Pauraniks, but we have here proof to the contrary.
They are also distinguished by the people of the
country. Although identical through great part of
their course, they rise as different streams, and
again divide and enter the Gariga by distinct
branches.

20 The recurrence of the same name in this, as in
several similar subsequent instances, is possibly an
error of the copyist; but it is also sometimes likely
that one name is applied to different rivers. In one
MS. we have, in place of this word. Caitravati; and
in another Vetravati.

21. Read also Satavari. According to Wilford,
the Saravati is the Ban-gangi.

22. The Vayu has Para, which is a river in
Malwa, the Pirvati MSS. read Vani and Vena.

23. According to the Vayu, this rises to the
Sahya ms. and flows towards the south: it is
therefore the Beema of Aurungabad.

24. The Kaveri is well known, and has always
borne the sarne appellation, being the Chaberis of
Ptolemy.

25, Read Culuka.

26. Read also Tapi; the Tapti river of the Dekhin.

27. Read Ahita and Sahita,

28. Rises in the Sahya mountain, and flows
southwards : Vayu. etc.

29. Read Vichitra.

30. Several rivers are called by this name, as
well as the Indus : there is one of some note, the
Kali Sindh in Malwa. .

31. Also Vajini.

32, This agrees best in name with the Beema : it
is also mentioned as a tirtha in the Mahabharata.

33. From Suktimat ; Kiirma and Vayu. There is a
Balasan from the eastern portion of the Himdlaya, a
feeder of the Mah&ananda, which may be the
Palasini, if the mountain be in this direction.

34. Also Pippalalavati, The Vayu has a Pippala
from the Rksa mountain.

35. Also Kusavira.

36. Also Mahika and Marundaci.

37 Also Sena.

38. Read Krtavati and Ghrtavati.

39. Also Dhusulya.

40. Also Atikrsna.

41. In place of both Suvarthaci.

42 From Paripatra : Vayu and Matsya.

43 Also Kusandara.

44 Also Sasikanta.

45 Also Vastra and Suvastr.

46. One of the tirthas in the Mahabharata.

47. According to the Mahabharata, this rises in
the Vaidurya mountain, part of the southern

Vindhya or Sathpura range.

48 Also Kuvira.

49 Three MSS. agree in reading _ this
Ambuvahini.

50 AlsoVainadi.

51. Also Kuvena : it is possibly meant for the

Tungabhadra or Tumbudra.

52. A river in Malwa. so called from the city of
the same ndme, which I have elsewhere conjectured
to be Bhilsa. Megha Dita. 31. There is a ‘Bess’
river in the mfps, which joins the Betwa at Bhilsa,
and is probably the river of the text.

53. The Vama or Suvami. 'the beautiful river.'
Wilford identifies with the Ramaganga.

54 Also Mahapaga, 'the greal river.'

55. Also Kuchchila.

56. The Sona river, rising in Mainaka or
Amarakantaka and flowing east to the Ganga.
