THE VISNU-PURANAM
BOOK VI

CHAPTER I
प्रथमोऽध्याय:

(कलिधर्मनिरूपणम्)
aaa sara
व्याख्याता भवता सर्ग-वंश-मन्वन्तरस्थिति:।
वंशानुचरितिञ्चैव विस्तरेण महामुने।। en
श्रोतुमिच्छाम्यहं wat यथावदुपसंहरतिम्।
महाप्रलयसंस्थानं कल्पान्ते च महामुने।। २॥

Maitreya said— You have narrated to me,
illustrious sage, the creation of the world, the
genealogies of the patriarchs, the duration of
the Manvantaras, and the dynastics of princes,
in detail. I am now desirous to hear from you
an account of the dissolution of the world, the
season of total destruction, and that which
occurs at the expiration of the Kalpa'.

पराशर उवाच
मैत्रेय श्रूयतां मत्तो यथावदुपसंहति:।
कल्पान्ते Wed चैव प्रलयो जायते यथा॥ ३॥
अहोरात्रं पितॄणान्तु मासोसोऽब्दस्तिदिवौकसाम।
चतुयुर्गसहस्रे तु ब्रह्मणो द्वे द्विजोत्तम॥ vi
gd त्रेता द्वापरश्च कलिश्चैव चतुर्युगम्।
दिव्यैर्वर्षसहस्रैस्तु तद् द्वादशभिरुच्यते।। ५॥
चतुर्युगाण्यशेषाणि सदृशानि स्वरूपत:।
आद्यं कृतयुगं मुक्त्वा मैत्रेयान्ते तथा कलिम्॥ ६॥
आद्येवृ’॰न्तयुगेसर्गोब्रह्यणात्रित्र्यतेयत:।
feat चोपसंहारस्तथान्ते च कलौ FAM ७॥

Parasara said— Hear from me, Maitreya,
exactly the circumstances of the end of all
things, and the dissolution that occurs either at
the expiration of a Kalpa, or that which takes
place at the close of the life of Brahma. A

month of mortals is a day and night of the
progenitors: a year of mortals is a day and
night of the gods. Twice a thousand aggregates
of the four ages is a day and night of Brahma’.
The four ages are the Krta, Treté, Dvapara,
and Kali; comprehending together twelve
thousand years of the gods. There are infinite
successions of these four ages, of a similar
description, the first of which is always called
the Krta, and the last the Kali. In the first, the
Krta, is that age which is created by Brahma;
in the last, which is the Kali age, a dissolution
of the world occurs.

मैत्रेय उवाच

we: स्वरूपं भगवन् विस्तराद् वक्तुमर्हसि।
धर्म्मश्चतुष्पाद्भगवन् यस्मिन् विप्लवमृच्छति।। ८॥

Maitreya said— Venerable sir, you are able
to give me a description of the nature of the
Kali age, in which four-footed virtue’ suffers
total extinction.

WI उवाच

कले: स्वरूपं मैत्रेय यद्भवान् प्रष्टुमिच्छति।

तन्निबोध समासन्नं वर्त्तते यन्महामुने।। ९॥

Parasara replied— Hear, Maitreya, an
account of the nature of the Kali age,

respecting which you have inquired, and
which is now close at hand.

वर्णाश्रमाचारवती प्रवृत्तिर्न कलौ नृणाम्।

न साम-ऋॠग्-यजुर्वेदविनिष्पादनहेतुका॥ १०॥।
विवाहा न कलौ धर्म्मय्या न शिष्य-गुरुसंस्थिति:।
न दाम्पत्यक्रमो नैव वह्निदैवात्मक: क्रम:।। ११॥
यत्र तत्र Hel जातो बली सर्वेश्चर: कलौ।
सर्वेभ्य Va वर्णेभ्यो योग्य: कन्यावरोधने।। १२॥
येन केनैव योगेन द्विजातिर्दीक्षित: कलौ।
