228

कृतवानष्टमं भागं न व्यशातयताव्ययम्॥ ९॥

यत् Yale वैष्णवं तेज: शातितं विश्वकर्मणा।

जाज्वल्यमानमपतत्तद् भूमौ मुनिसत्तम।। १०॥

त्वष्टैव तेजसा तेन विष्णोश्चक्रमकल्पयत्।

त्रिशूलञ्चैव रुद्रस्य शिबिकां धनदस्य TU ११॥

शक्तिं गुहस्य देवानामन्येषाञ्च यदायुथम्।

तत्सर्वं तेजसा तेन विश्वकर्मा व्यवर्द्धयत्।। १२॥

ParaSara said~ Sanjfié, the daughter of
VisSvakarman, was the wife of the sun and bore
him three children, the Manu (Vaivasvata),
Yama and the goddess Yami (or the Yamuna
river). Unable to endure the fervours of her
lord, Sanjfid gave him Chaya! as his handmaid
and repaired to the forests to practise devout
exercises. The sun, supposing Chaya to be his
wife Sanjfid, begot by her three other children,
Sanigcara (Saturn), another Manu (SAvarni)
and a daughter Tapati (the Tapti river). Chaya,
upon one occasion, being offended with
Yama,’ the son of Sanjfia, denounced an
imprecation upon him and thereby revealed to
Yama and to the sun that the was not in truth
Sanjfié, the mother of the former. Being
further informed by Chaya that his wife had
gone to the wilderness, the sun beheld her by
the eye of medication engaged in austerities, in
the figure of a mare (in the region of Uttara
Kuru). Metamorphosing himself into a horse,
he rejoined his wife and begot three other
children, the two Asvins and Revanta and then
brought Sanjfia back to his own dwelling. To
diminish his intensity, Visvakarman placed the
luminary on his lathe, to grind off some of his
effulgence; and in this manner reduced it an
eighth, for more than that was inseparable.’
The parts of the divine Vaisnava splendour,
residing in the sun, that were filed off by
Visvakarman, fell blazing down upon the earth
and the artist constructed of them the discus of
Visnu, the trident of Siva, the weapon’ of the
god of wealth, the lance of Kartikeya and the
weapons of the other gods: -all these
Visvakarman fabricated from the superfluous
rays of the sun.°

THE VISNU-PURANAM

छायासंज्ञासुतो योऽसौ द्वितीय: कथितो मनु:।
पूर्वजस्य सवर्णोऽसौ सावर्णिस्तेन चोच्यते।। १३॥
तस्य मन्वन्तरं ह्येतत् सावणिकमथाष्टमम्।
तच्छृणुष्व महाभाग! भविष्यं कथयामि Ti १४॥
सावर्णिस्तु मनुर्योऽसौ मैत्रेय! भविता तत:।
सुतपाश्चामिताभाश्च मुख्याश्चापि तदा सुरा:।। १५॥
तेषां गणस्तु देवानामेकैको विंशक: स्मृत:।
सप्तर्धीनपि वक्ष्यामि भविष्यान् मुनिसत्तम।। १६॥
दीप्तिमान् गालवो राम: कृपो द्रोणिस्तथा पर:।
मत्पुत्रस्तु तथा व्यास ऋष्यशृङ्गश्च सप्तम:॥ १७॥
विष्णुप्रसादानघ: पातालान्तरगोचर:।

विरोचनसुतस्तेषां बलिरिन्द्रो भविष्यति।। १८॥

विरजाश्चार्वरीवांश्च निर्मोहाद्यास्तथापरे।
सावर्णेस्तु मनो: पुत्रा भविष्यन्ति नरेश्वरा:॥१९॥

The son of Chaya, who was called also a
Manu, was denominated Savarni,° from being
of the same caste (Savarna) as his elder
brother, the Manu Vaivasvata. He presides
over the ensuing or eighth Manvantara; the
particulars of which and the following, I will
now relate. In the period in which Savarni
shall be the Manu, the classes of the gods will
be Sutapas, Amitabhas and Mukhyas; twenty-
one of each. The seven Rsis will be Diptimat,
Galava, Rama, Krpa, Drauni; my son Vyasa
will be the sixth and the seventh will be Rs
yasrnga.’ The Indra will be Bali, the sinless
son of Virocana, who through the favour of
Visnu is actually sovereign of part of Patala.
The royal progeny of Savarni will be Virajas,
Arvarivas, Nirmoha and others.

नवमो दक्षसावर्णो मैत्रेय! भविता मनु:।

पारा मरीचिगर्भाश्च सुधर्माणस्तथा त्रिधा।। २०॥
भविष्यन्ति त्तदा SAT एकैको द्वादशो गण:।
तेषामिन्द्रो महावीर्यो भविष्यत्यद् भुतो द्विज।। २१॥
सबलो द्युतिमान् भव्यो वसुर्मेधा धृतिस्तथा।
ज्योतिष्मान् सप्तम: सत्यस्तत्रैते च महर्षय:।॥ २२॥
धृतकेतुर्दीप्तिकेतु: पञ्चहस्तो निरामय:।

पृथुश्रवाद्याश्च तथा दक्षसावर्णिकात्मजा:। २३॥
