३12

THE VISNU-PURANAM

provide each building with elegant couches
and seats and furniture and to attach to them
gardens and groves, with reservoirs of water,
where the wild-duck and the swan should sport
amidst beds of lotus flowers. The divine artist
obeyed his injunctions and _ constructed
splendid apartments for the wives of the Rsi;
in which by command of Saubhari, the
inexhaustible and divine treasure called
Nanda”! took up his permanent abode and the
princesses entertained all their guests and
dependants with abundant viands of every
description and the choicest quality.

एकदा तु दुहितृस्नेहाकृष्टहृदय: स महीपतिरति-
gare: सुखिता वा sit विचिन्त्य तस्य
रेराश्रममपे a टिकमयीं
प्रासादमालामतिरम्योपवनजलाशयां ZIRT ३७॥

Wage चैकं प्रासादमात्मजां परिष्वज्य कृतासनपरिग्रह:
प्रवृत्तस्नेहनयनाम्बुगर्भनयनोऽब्रवीत्।। ३ ८॥

अप्यत्र वत्से भवत्या: सुखमुत किश्चिदसुखम् aft ते
weft: स्नेहंवान्, st संस्मर्यतेऽस्मद्गृहवासस्य? इत्युक्ता
wat पितरमाह- ata! अतिशयरमणीय: प्रासादोऽत्र॰

मतिशोभनम्॥३९॥

After some period had elapsed, the heart of
king Mandhatri yearned for his daughters and
he left solicitous to know whether they were
happily circumstanced. Setting off therefore
on a visit to the hermitage of Saubhari, he
beheld upon his arrival a row of beautiful
crystal palaces, shining as brilliantly as the
rays of the sun and situated amidst lovely
gardens and reservoirs of pellucid water.
Entering into one of these magnificent palaces,
he found and embraced a daughter and said to
her, as the tears of affection and delight
trembled in his eyes, "Dear child, tell me how
it is with you. Are you happy here? Or not?

Does the great sage treat you with tenderness?
or do you revert with regret to your early
home?" The princess replied, "You behold, my
father, how delightful a mansion I inhabit,
surrounded by lovely gardens and lakes, where
the lotus blooms and the wild swans murmur.
Here I have delicious viands, fragrant
unguents, costly ornaments, splendid raiment,
soft beds and every enjoyment that affluence
can procure. Why then should I call to
memory the place of birth? To your favour am
I indebted for all that I possess.

faq एतन्ममैकं दु:खकारणम्, यदस्मद्धरत्तास्मद्गेहान्न
नि:सरति। ममैव केवलमतिप्रीत्या wie, नान्यासां
weit, wa मम ween दु:ख्रिता

समस्तप्रासादेषु राजा प्रविवेश। तनयां तनया तथैवापृच्छत्,
ताभिश्च तथैवाभिहित: परितोषविस्मयनिर्भरविवशहृदयो
भगवन्तं सौभरिमेकान्तावस्थितमुपेत्य कृतपूजोऽग्रवीत्।। ४०॥

I have only one cause of anxiety, which is
this; my husband is never absent from my
dwelling : solely attached to me, he is always
at my side; he never goes near my sisters; and
I am concerned to think that they must feel

mortified by his neglect; the only
circumstance that gives me uneasiness."
Proceeding to visit another of his

daughters, the king, after embracing her and
sitting down, made the same inquiry and
received the same account of the complaint,
that the Rsi was wholly devoted to her and
paid no attention to her sisters. In every place
Mandhatri heard the same story from each of
his daughters in reply to his questions; and
with a heart overflowing with wonder and
delight he repaired to the wise Saubhari,
whom he found alone and after paying homage
to him, thus addressed him :

दृष्टस्ते भगवन् सूमहानेष सिद्धिप्रभावो नैवंविधमन्यस्य
