548

THE VISNU-PURANAM

वसन्ति aa भूतानि भूतात्मन्यखिलात्मनि।
सर्वभूतेष्वशेषेषु वकारार्थस्ततोऽन्यय:॥ ७५॥
Wane महाशब्दो भगवानिति सत्तम।

परमब्रह्मभूतस्य वासुदेवस्य नान्यत:॥७६॥

तत्र पूज्ययदार्थोक्ति-परिभाषासमन्वित:।

शब्दोऽयं नोपचारेण BATT ह्युपचारत:॥७७॥
उत्पत्तिं प्रलयञ्चैव भूतानामगतिं गतिम्।

वेत्ति विद्यामविद्याञ्च स वाच्यो भगवानिति।।७८॥
भगवच्छब्दवाच्यानि विना हेयैर्गुणादिभि:॥ ७ ९॥

The dissyllable Bhaga indicates the six
properties, dominion, might, glory, splendour,
wisdom and dispassion. The purport of the
letter va is that elemental spirit in which all
beings exist, and which exists in all beings’.
And thus this great word Bhagavan is the
name of Vasudeva, who is one with the
supreme Brahma, and of no one else. This
word therefore, which is the general
denomination of an adorable object, is not
used in reference to the supreme in a general,
but a special signification. When applied to
any other (thing or person) it is used in its
customary or general import. In the latter case
it may purport one who knows the origin and
end and revolutions of beings, and what is
wisdom, what ignorance. In the former it
denotes wisdom, energy, power, dominion,
might, glory, without end, and without defect.

सर्वाणि aa भूतानि वसन्ति परमात्मनि।
भूतेषु च स सर्वात्मा वासुदेवस्तत: WANs on
खाण्डिक्यजनकायाह ye: केशिध्वज: पुरा।
नामाव्याख्यमनन्तस्य वासुदेवस्य TITUS
भूतेषु वसते सोऽन्तर्वसन्त्यत्र च तानि यत्।
धाता विधाता जगतां वासुदेवस्तत: प्रभु: US BN
स सर्वभूतप्रकृतिं विकारान्
अतीतसर्वावरणोऽखिलात्मा

तेनास्तृतं यद्भुवान्तराले॥ ८ ३॥

समस्तकल्याणगुणात्मको हि
स्वशक्तिलेशावृतभूतवर्ण:।
इच्छागृहीताभिमतोरुदेह

ऽसौ॥ ८४॥

The term Vasudeva means that all beings
abide in that supreme beings, and that he
abides in all beings, as was formerly
explained by Kesidhvaja to Khandikya, called
Janaka, when he inquired of him an
explanation of the name of the immortal,
Vasudeva, He said, “He dwells internally in all
beings, and all things dwell in him; and thence
the lord Vasudeva is the creator and preserver
of the world. He, though one with all beings,
is beyond and separate from material nature
(Prakrti), from its products, from properties,
from imperfections: he is beyond all investing
substance: he is universal soul; all the
interstices of the universe are filled up by him:
he is one with all good qualities; and all
created beings are endowed with but a small
portion of his individuality. Assuming at will
various forms, he bestows benefits on the
whole world, which was his work.

त्तेजोबलैश्वर्यमहावबोध:
स्ववीर्यशक्त्यादिगुणैकराशि:।
Ul: WTO सकला न यत्र
क्लेशादय: सन्ति परापरेशे।। ८५॥
a ईश्वरो व्यष्टिसमष्टिरूपो
व्यक्तस्वरूपोऽप्रकटस्वरूप:।
सर्वेश्चर: सर्वग: सर्ववेत्ता
समस्तशक्ति: पममेश्वराख्य:। ८ ६॥
संज्ञायते येन तदस्तदोषं
शुद्धं wit निर्मलमेकरूपम्।
संदृश्यते वाप्यधिगम्यते वा
तज्ज्ञानमज्ञानमतोऽन्यदुक्तम्। ८७॥
Glory, might, dominion, wisdom, energy,
power, and other attributes, are collected in

him. Supreme of the supreme, in whom no
imperfections abide, lord over finite and
