BOOK Hi, CHAP. 18

293

शेते चाप्येकशयमे स सद्यस्तत्समो भवेत्।४४॥
देवतापितृभूतानि तथानभ्यर्च्य योऽतिथीन्।
भुङ्क्ते स पातकं भुङ्क्ते निष्कृतिस्तस्य कीदृशी॥ ४५॥

Let not a man associate, in residence,
sitting or society, with him whose person or
whose house has been blasted by the sighs of
the gods, progenitors and _ spirits.
Conversation, interchange of civilities or
association with a man who for are a twelve
month has not discharged his religious duties,
is productive of equality of guilt; and the
person who eats in the house of such a man or
sits down with him or sleeps on the same
couch with him, becomes like him
instantaneously. Again; he who takes his food
without showing reverence to the gods,
progenitors, spirits and guests, commits sin.

ब्राह्मणाद्यास्तु ये ant: स्वधर्मादन्यतोमुखम्।
यान्ति ते नग्नसंज्ञां तु हीनकर्मस्ववस्थिता:॥४६॥

How great is his sin! The Brahmanas and
men of the other castes, who turn their faces
away from their proper duties, become
heretics and are classed with these who
relinquish pious works.

चतुर्णां aa वर्णानां मैत्रेयात्यन्तसङ्कर:।

तत्रास्या साधु वृत्तीनामुपघाताय जायते॥४७॥
अनभ्यर्च्य ऋषीन् देवान् पितॄन् भूतातिथीस्तथा।

यो भुङ्क्ते तस्य सम्भाषात् एतन्ति नरके नरा:।।४८॥

Remaining in a place where there is too
great an intermixture of the four castes is
detrimental to the character of the righteous.
Men fall into hell who converse with one who
takes his food without offering a portion to the
gods, the sages, the manes, spirits and guests.

तस्मादेतान्नरो नग्नांस्त्रयीसन्त्यागदूषितान्।
सर्वदा वर्जयेत् प्राज्ञ आलापस्पर्शनादिषु॥४९॥
श्रद्धावद्भि: कृतं यत्नाद्देवान् पितृपितामहान्।

न प्रीणयति तच्छाद्धं यदेभिरवलोकितम्॥ ५०॥

Let therefore a prudent person carefully
avoid the conversation or the contact and ‘the
like, of those heretics who are rendered impure

by their desertion of the three Vedas. The
ancestral rite, although performed with zeal
and faith, pleases neither gods nor progenitors
if it be looked upon by apostates.

श्रूयते च पुरा ख्यातो राजा शतधनुर्भुवि।
पत्नी व शैव्या तस्याभूदतिधर्मपरायणा। ५ १॥
पतिव्रता महाभागा सत्यशौचदयान्विता।
सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्ना विनयेन नयेन ANG Vl
स तु राजा तया Wes देवदेवं जनार्दनम्।
आराधयामास विभुं परमेण समाधिना।। ५३॥
होमैर्जपैस्तथा दार्नैरुपवासैश्च भक्तित:।
पूजाभिश्चानुदिवसं तन्मना नान्यमानस:।॥ ५५॥

It is related that there was formerly a king
named Satadhanu, whose wife Saivya was a
woman of great virtue. She was devoted to her
husband, benevolent, sincere, pure, adorned
with every female excellence, with humility
and discretion. The Raja and his wife daily
worshipped the god of gods, Jandrdana, with
pious meditations, oblations of fire, prayers,
gifts, fasting and every other mark of entire
faith and exclusive devotion.

एकदा तु समं स्नातौ तौ तु भार्यापती जले।

भागीरथ्या: समुत्तीर्णौ कार्तिक्यां समुपोषितौ।
पाषण्डिनमपश्येतामायान्तं सम्मुखं fay «It
चापाचार्यस्य तस्यासौ सखा राज्ञो महात्मन:।

अतस्तद्वीरवासैन सह्मल।पमथाकरोत्॥ ५७॥

न तु सा वागयता देवी तस्य पत्नी पतिव्रता।

उपोषितास्मीति रविं तस्मिन् दृष्टे ददर्श ANG cil

On one occasion, when they had fasted on

the full moon of Kartika and had bathed in the
Bhagirathi, they beheld, as they came up from
the water, a heretic approach them, who was
the friend of the Raja's military preceptor. The
Raja, out of respect to the latter, entered into
conversation with the heretic; but not so did
the princess; reflecting that she was observing
a fast, she turned from him and cast her eyes
up to the sun.

समागम्य यथान्यायं दम्पती तौ यथाविधि।
विष्णो: पूजादिकं सर्वं कृतवन्तौ द्विजोत्तम।। ५९॥
