48

मैत्रेय उवाच

क्षीराव्यो st: समुत्पन्ना श्रूयतेऽमृतमन्थमे।

भृगो: ख्यात्यां समुत्पन्नेत्येतदाह कथं TaN १४॥

Maitrcya.—It is commonly said that the
goddess Sri was born from the sea of milk,
when it was churned for ambrosia; how then
can you say that she was the daughter of
Bhreu by Khyati ?
पराशर उवाच

नित्यैव सा जगन्मातां विष्णो: श्रीरनपायिनी।

यथा सर्वगतो विष्णुस्तथैवेयं द्विजोत्तम।। १५॥

अर्थो विष्णुरियं वाणी नीतिरेषा नयो हरि:।

बोधो विष्णुरियं बुद्धिर्धम्मोऽसौ सत्क्रिया त्वियम्।। १६॥

an विष्णुरियं off: श्रीर्भूमिर्भूधरो हरि:।।

सन्तोषो War लक्ष्मीस्तुष्टिर्मैत्रेय शाश्वती।। १७॥

इच्छा श्रीभर्मवान् कामो यज्ञोऽसौ दक्षिणा तु सा।

आज्याहुतिरसौ Sat पुरोडाशो TET १८॥

Pardsara said— Sri, the bride of Visnu, the

mother of the world, is eternal, imperishable;
in like manner as he is all-pervading, so also is
she, oh best of Brahmanas, omnipresent. Visnu
is meaning; she is speech. Hari is polity
(Nyaya); she is prudence (Niti). Visnu is
understanding; she is intellect. He is
righteousness; she is devotion. He is the
creator; she is creation. Sri is the earth; Hari
the support of it. The deity is concent; the
eternal Laksmi is resignation. He is desire; Sri
if wish. He is sacrifice; she is sacrificial
donation (Daksina). The goddcss is the
invocation which attends the  oblation;
Janarddana is the oblaiion.

पत्नीशाला मुने लक्ष्मी: प्राग्वशो मधुसूदन:।
चितिर्लक्ष्मीर्हरिर्यूप इध्मा श्रीर्भगवान् कुश:।॥ १९॥
सामस्वरूपी भगवानुद्गीति: कमलालया।

स्वाहा लक्ष्मीर्जगन्नाथो वासुदेवो हुताशन:॥२०॥
शङ्करो भगवाञ्छौरिर्भूतिगौरी द्विजोत्तम।

मैत्रेय केशव: सूर्च्यस्तत्प्रभा कमलालया।। २ १

at: श्री: सर्वात्मको विष्णुरवकाशोऽतिविस्तर:॥ २ २॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

शशाङ्क: sitet: कान्ति: श्रीस्तस्थैवानपायिनी।
धृतिर्लक्ष्मीर्जगच्चेष्टा arg: सर्वत्रगो हरि:॥ २३॥

Laksmi is the chamber where the females
are present (at a _ religious ceremony);
Madhustidana the apartment of the males of
the family. Laksmi is the altar, Hari the stake
(to which the victim is bound). Sri is the fuel;
Hari the holy grass (KuSa). He is the
personified Sama-veda; the goddess, lotus-
throned, is the tone of its chanting. Laksmi is
the prayer of oblation (Svaha); Vasudeva, the
lord of the world, is the sacrincial fire. Sauri
(Visnu) is Sankara (Siva); and Sri is the bride
of Siva (Gauri). Kesgava, oh Maitreya, is the
sun; and his radiance is the lotuses cated
goddess. Visnu is the tribe of progenitors
(Pitrgana); Padma is their bride (Svadha), the
eternal bestower of nutriment. Sri is the
heavens; Visnu, who is one with all things, is
wide extended space. The lord of Sri is the
moon; she is his unfading light. She is called
the moving principle of the world; he, the
wind which bloweth every where.

जलधिर्बिज गोविन्दस्तद्वेला श्रीर्महामते।

लक्ष्मीस्वरूपमिन्द्राणी Saat मधुसूदन:॥ २४॥

यमश्चक्रधर: साक्षाद् धूमोर्णा कमलालया।

mfg: ot: श्रीघरो देव: स्वयमेव धनेश्वर:।। २५॥

Govinda is the occan; Laksmi its shore.
Laksmi is the consort of Indra (Indrani);
Madhustidana is Devendra. The holder of the
discus (Visnu) is Yama (the regent of
Tartarus); the lotus-throned goddess is his
dusky spouse (Dhimorna). Sri is wealth;
Sridhara (Visnu) is himself the god of riches
(Kuvera).

गौरी लक्ष्मीर्महाभागा केशवो वरुण: स्वयम्।
श्रीर्देवसेना fats देवसेनापतिर्हरि:।। २६॥
अवष्टम्भो गदापाणि: शक्तिर्लक्ष्मीद्विजोत्तम।

SST लक्ष्मीर्निमेषोऽसौ मुहूर्तोऽसौ कला तु An २७॥
ज्योत्स्ना wat: प्रदीपोऽसौ ad: सर्वेश्वरो हरि:।
लताभूता जगन्माता श्रीर्विष्णुर्दुपसंस्थित:।। २ ८॥
विभावरी श्रीर्दिवसो देवश्चक्रगदाधर:।
