BOOK III, CHAP. ६

297

तोयप्रदानपितृपिण्डबहिष्कृतानां।
सम्भाषणादपि AW नरकं प्रयान्ति।। Qo XII
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे अष्टादशोऽध्याय: समाप्त:॥

These are the unrighteous heretics to whom
a man must not give shelter and speaking to
whom effaces whatever merit he may that day
have obtained. Men, indeed, fall into hell as
the consequence of only conversing with those
who unprofitably assume the twisted hair and
shaven crown; with those who feed without
offering food to gods, spirits and guests; and
whose who are excluded from the presentation

of cakes and libations of water, to the manes.
६.३.३.३

NOTES

1. The situation chosen for the first appearance
of the heresy agrees well enough with the great
prevalence of the Jain faith in the west of India in
the eleventh and twelfth centuries (As. Res. XVI.
318) or perhaps a century earlier and is a
circumstance of same weight ‘in investigating the
date of the Visnu Purana.

2. A bunch of peacock's feathers is still an
ordinary accompaniment of a Jain mendicant.
According to the Hindi poem, the Prthu Rai Caritra,
it was borne by the Buddhist Amara Sinha; but that
work is not, perhaps, very good authority for
Bauddha observances, at least of an ancient date.

3. In this and the preceding contradictions it is
probable that the writer refers, although not with
much precision, to the sceptical tenets of the Jains,
whence they are called commonly Syadvadis,
assertors of probabilities or of what may be. These
usually form seven categories or 1. A thing is; 2. It
is not; 3. It is and it is not; 4. It is not definable; 5.
It is, but is not definable; 6. It ig not, neither is it
definable; 7. It is and it is not and is not definable.
Hence the Jains are also termed Saptavadis and
Saptabhangis, assertors and oppugners of seven

propositions. As. Res. XVII. 271; and Trans. Royal
As. Soc. 1. 555.

4. Here is further confirmation of the Jains being
intended by our text, as the term Arhat is more
particularly applied to them, although it is also used
by the Buddhists.

5. We have there the Bauddhas noticed as a
distinct sect. If the author wrote from a personal
knowledge of Buddhists in India, he could not have
written much later than the 10" or 11” century.

6. That is, according to the commentator, a
Sraddha may be performed for a man who is
abroad by any of his kinsmen who are tarrying at
home; it will be of equal benefit to him as if he
offered it himself; he will equally eat of the
consecrated food.

7. We have in these passages, no doubt, allusion
to the Varhospatyas or followers of Brhaspati, who
seem to have been numerous and bold at some
period anterior to the 14" century. As. Res. XVI. 5.

8. We may have in this conflict of the orthodox
divinities and heretical Daityas some covert
allusion to political troubles, growing out of
religious differences and the final predominance of
Brahmanism, Such occurrences seem to have
preceded the invasions of India by the
Mohammedans and prepared the way for their
victories.

9. There is a play upon the word Bali, which
means 'tribute', or ‘fragments of a meal scattered
abroad to the birds’,

10, The legend is peculiar to the Visnu Purana,
although the doctrine it inculcates is to be found
elsewhere.

11. Haitukas, ‘causalists's either the followers of
the Nyaya or ‘logical’ philosophy or Bauddhas,
those who take nothing upon authority and admit
nothing that cannot be proved; or it is explained,
those who by argument cast a doubt upon the
efficacy of acts of devotion.

wk

END OF THE THIRD BOOK
