BOOK IV, 1

303

The commentator regards them, however, as but
nine, considering Nabhaga-nedista but one name or
Nedista the father of Nabhaga. The number is
generally stated to be nine, although there is some
variety in the names, particularly in this name,
which occurs Nabhagadista, Nabhagaristha; and
also separated, as Nabhaga, Nabhaga or Nabhaga;
Nedista, Dista and Arista : the latter, as in the
Karma, distinctly stated, नाभागो ORB: 1 Again, नेदिष्ट:
सप्तम: स्मृत: | Brahma p. The commentator on the Hari
Varhga quotes the Vedas for Nabhagadista : नाभागदिष्टं
a मानवमिति श्रुति:। but the name occurs as Nabhanedist
ha in the Aitareya Brahmana of the Rgveda, where
a story is told of his being excluded from all share
of his inheritance, on the plea of his being wholly
devoted to a religious life : WHR वै मानवं ब्रह्मचर्य्य
aad भ्रातरो निरभजन्। See also As. Res. VIII. 384. The
name as ordinarily written, Nabhaga, 'no-share', has
nevertheless an obvious connection with the
legend. The name of Nrga is found only in our text,
the Padma and the Bhagavata : the Vdyu has
Najava. Prangu is also the reading of the Vayu and
Agni, but not of the rest, which have Vena, Vanya,
Danda, Kusganadbha or Kavi, in its place. The
Mahabharata, Adi Parva, p. 113, has Vena, Dhrsnu,
Narisyanta, Nabhaga, Iksvaku, K4risa, Saryati, 114,
Prsadhra and Nabhagaristha. The Padma Purana, in
the Patala Khanda, says there were ‘ten' and names
them Iksvaku, Nrga, Dista, Dhrsta, Kardsa, Saryati,
Narisyanta, Prsadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi.

5. warmed होतुरपचारात्। ‘That sacrifice being
wrongly offered, through the improper invocations
of the Hotri.' It is also read अपहते ‘frustrated’. This is
rather a brief and obscure allusion to what appears
to be an ancient legend and one that has undergone
various modifications. According to the Matsya, no
change of sex took place in the first instance. The
eldest son of Manu was Ida or Ila ($8: or इल:),
whom his father appointed sovereign of the seven
Dvipas. In his progress round his dominions, Ia
came to the forest of Sambhu or Siva; entering into
which, he was changed to a female, Ila, agreeably
to a promise made formerly by Siva to Parvati, who
had been once unseasonably broken in upon by
some sages, that such a transformation should be
inflicted on every male who trespassed upon the
sacred grove. After a season, the brothers of Ila
sought for him and _ finding him thus
metamorphosed, applied to Vasistha, their father’s

priest, to know the cause. He explained it to them
and directed them to worship Siva and his bride.
They did so, accordingly; and it was announced by
the deities, that, up on the performance of an
ASvamedha by Iksvaku, Ila should become a
Kirnpurusa, named Sudyumna and that he should
be a male one month and female another month,
alternately. The Vayu, which is followed by most
of the other authorities states that upon Manu's
offering their share of the sacrifice to Mitra and
Varuna, instead of a boy, a girl was born ;
according to the Vedas. इडा जज्ञे इति श्रुति:। Manu
desired her to follow him; तामिलेत्यथहोवाच मनुर्दण्डधर:
Ba: | अनुगच्छामि भद्रं ते तमिला प्रत्युवाच ह।। whence her
name 114 (from Ila or ida, 'come’), There, however,
Manu propitiates Mitra and Varuna and the girl Ila
or Sudyumna by their favour : as the Markandeya;
aaa ताभ्या मुक्तं तु देवाभ्यां । इला दकृ: समभवत्
सुद्युम्न इति विश्रुत:।। Sudyumna's subsequent change to
a female again, is told much as in the Matsya; but
his being alternately male and female is not
mentioned in the Vayu any more than it is in our
text. The Bhagavata ugrees in that respect with the
Matsya, but it has evidently embellished the earlier
part of the legend by the introduction of another
character, Sraddhi, the wife of the Manu. It is said
that it was by her instigation, as she was desirous of
having a girl, that the ministering Brahmanas
altered the purpose of the rite, in consequence of
which a girl, instead of a boy, was born. The
similarity of the name has induced the learned
author of the Origin of Pagan Idolatry to conceive
that he has found the Ila of the Hindus in the II or
Ilus of the Phoenicians. "The Phoenician II is the
masculine Ila of the Hindus and Indo Scythae and
Ila was a title of Manu or Buddha, who was
preserved in the ark at the time of the dcluge:" I.
156 : and the thence concludes that Ila must be
Noah; while other circumstances in his Phoenician
history identify him with Abraham. I. 159, Again;
"Tlus or 1] is a regular Cuthic name of Buddha,
which the Phoenicians, I have no doubt, brought
with them; for Buddha or Manu, in the character of
Ila, is said to have married his own daughter, who
is described as the offspring of an ancient
personage that was preserved in an ark at the time
of the deluge." I. 223. Now whatever connection
there may be between the names of lla, I], Hus,
Tlium, [a ‘the earth’ and Ilos ‘slime’, there is no very
