BOOK V, CHAP. 25

अथवा किं तदालापैरपरा क्रियतां कथा।
तस्यास्माभिविना तेन विनास्माकं भविष्यति।। १५॥

Krsna having by this stratagem destroyed
his enemy, returned to Mathura, and took
captive his army, rich in horses, elephants and
cars, which he conducted to Dvdaraka, and
delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu race was
relieved from all fear of invasion. Baladeva,
when hostilities had entirely ceased, being
desirous of seeing his kinsmen. went to
Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed
with the herdsmen and their females, with
affection and respect. By some, the elders, ४९
was embraced; others, the juniors, he
embraced and with those of his own age, male
or female, he talked and laughed. The cow
herds made many kind speeches to Halayudha;
but some of the Gopis spoke to him with the
affectation of anger, or with feelings of
jealousy, as they inquired after the loves of
Krsna with the women of Mathura. “Ts all well
with the fickle and inconstant Krsna ?" said
they: “Does the volatile swain, the friend of an
instant, amuse the women of the city by
laughing at our rustic efforts (to please him)?
Does he ever think of us, singing in chorus to
his songs ? Will he not come here once again
to see his mother ? But why talk of these
things? it is a different tale to tell for him
without us, and for us without him.

पिता माता त्तथा भ्राता AAT बन्धुजनश्च किम्।

न त्यक्तस्तत्कृतेऽस्माभिरकृतज्ञध्वजो हि स:॥ १६॥
तथापि क्वचिदालापमिहागमनसंश्रयम्।

करोति कृष्णो वक्तव्यं भवताकृष्ण नानृतम्।। १७॥
दामोदरोऽसौ दुर्दर्श: प्रतिभाति न:॥ १८॥

Father, mother, brother, hushand, kin, what
have we not abandoned for his sake ? but he is
a monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us does
not Krsna talk of coming here ? Falsehood is
never, O Krsna, to be uttered by you, Verily
this is Damodara, this is Govinda, who has
given up his heart to the damsels of the city,
who has no longer any regard for us, but looks
upon us with disdain.”

483

पराशर उवाच

आमन्तितं स कृष्णेति पुनर्दामोदरेति च।

जहसु: सुस्वरं गोप्यो हरिणा हृतचेतस:।। १९॥

सन्देश: साममधुरै: प्रेमवर्भेरगविचतै:।

रामेणाश्वसिता गोप्य: कृष्णस्यातिमनोहरै:॥ २०॥
शोपैश्च पूर्वचद् wa: परिहासमनोरमा:।
कथाश्चकार रेमे च सह तैर्व्रजभूमिषु॥ २ en

इति श्रीविष्णुप्रुसणे“पञ्चमांशे चतुर्विंश: अध्याय:॥

So saying, the Gopis, whose minds were
fixed on Krsna, addressed Rama in his place,
calling him Damodara and Govinda, and
laughed and were merry; and Rama consoled
them by communicating to them agreeable,
modest, affectionate, and gentle messages
from Krsna, With the cowherds he talked
mirthfully, as he had been wont to do, and
rambled along with them over the lands of
Vraja.!

NOTES

1. This visit of Balarama to Vraja is placed by
the Hari VamSa anterior to the fall of Mathura; by
the Bhagavata, long subsequent to the
establishment of the Yadus at Dvaraka.

kee
