BOOK III, CHAP. 12

267

CHAPTER 12
द्वादशोऽध्याय:

(गृहस्थाचारकथनम्)
और्व उवाच

देवगोब्राह्णणान् सिद्ध-वृद्धाचार्यास्तथार्चयेत्।
द्विकालञ्च नमेत् सन्ध्यामग्नीतुपचरेत्तथा।। et

सदानुपहते वस्त्रे प्रशस्ताश्च तथौषधी:।

गारुडानि च रत्नानि बिभृयात् प्रयतो AT २॥

प्रस्निग्धामलकेशाश्च सुगग्धिश्चारुवेषो धृक्।

सिता: सुमनसो wen बिभयाच at: Warn ३॥

Aurva  continued—"Let a_ respectable
householder ever venerate the gods, kine,
Brahmanas, saints, aged persons and holy
teachers. Let him observe the two daily
Sandhyds and offer oblations to fire. Let him
dress in untorn garments, use delicate herbs
and flowers, wear emeralds and other precious
stones, keep his hair smooth and neat, scent
his person with agreeable perfumes and
always go handsomely attired, decorated with
garlands of white flowers.

fafaq परस्वं न हरेन्नाल्पमप्यप्रियं वदेत्।
प्रियञ्च नानृतं क्रूयान्नान्यदोषानुदीरयेत्॥४॥

न दुष्टं यानमारोहेत् कूलच्छायां न संश्रयेत्॥५॥

Let him never appropriate another's
property, no address him with the lease
unkindness. Let him always speak amiably and
with truth and never make public another's
faults. Let him not desire another's prosperity,
nor seek his enmity. Let him not mount upon a
crazy vehicle, nor take shelter under the bank
of a river (which may fall upon him).

:।
बन्धकी-बन्धकीभर्त्त-क्षुद्रानृतकथै: AE ६॥

gat मैत्रीं न कुर्वीत नैक: पन्थानमाश्रयेत्।७॥
नावगाहेअलौघस्य वेगमग्ने TT!

प्रदीप्तं Aen न विशेन्नारोहेच्छिखरं तरो:॥ ८॥

न कुर्याद्दन्तसङ्घर्षं कुष्णीयाच्च न नासिकाम्।
नासंवृतमुखो जृम्भेच्छवासकासौ वर्जयेत्।। ९॥
नोच्चैर्हसेत् WHA न मुञ्चेत् पवनं बुध:।

नखान्नं वादयेच्छिन्य्यान्नं तृणं न महीं लिखेत्।। १०॥
न श्मश्नु भक्षयेल्लोष्टं न मृद्नीयाद् विचक्षण:।
ज्यौतींष्यमेध्यशस्तानि नाभिवीक्षेत च प्रभो।। ११॥
wat परस्तरियञ्चैव सूर्यं चास्तमयोदये।

न हुङ्कर्याच्छवञ्चैव शवगन्धो fe सोमज:॥१२॥
चतुष्यथांश्चैत्यतरून् श्मशानोपवनानि च।
दुष्टस्त्रीसन्निकर्षञ्च वर्जयेन्निशि सर्वदा।। १३॥

A wise man will not form a friendship nor
walk in the same path with one who is
disesteemed, who is a sinner or a drunkard,
who has many enemies or who is lousy, with a
harlot or her gallant, with a pauper or a liar,
with a prodigal, a slanderer or a knave. Let not
a man bathe against the strength of a rapid
stream, nor enter a house on fire. not climb to
the top of a tree; nor (in company) clean his
teeth or blow his nose, nor gape without
covering his mouth, nor clear his throat, nor
cough, nor laugh loudly, nor emit wind with
noise, nor bite his nails, not cut grass, nor
scratch the ground,' nor put his beard into his
