248

THE VISNU-PURANAM

कालिङ्ग उवाच
इति निजभटशासनाय देवो
रवितनय: स किलाह धर्मराज:।
मम कथितमिदञ्च तेन तुभ्यं
कुरुवर! सम्यगिदं मयापि चोक्तम्।। ३५॥
"Such', said the Kalinga Brahmana, 'were
the instructions communicated by the deity of
justice, the son of the sun, to his servants, as
they were repeated to me by that holy

personage and as I have related them to you,
chief of the house of Kuru’ (Bhisma).

wet उवाच

नकुलैतन्ममाख्यातं पूर्वं तेन द्विजन्मना।
कलिङ्गदेशादभ्येत्य प्रीयता सुमहात्मना।। ३६॥
मयाप्येतद् यथान्यायं सम्यग् वत्स! तवोदितम्।
यथा विष्णुमृते नान्यत् त्राणं संसारसागरे।। ३७॥
किङ्करा पाशदण्डाश्च न यमो न च यातना:।
समर्थास्तस्य यस्यात्मा केशवालम्बन: WAT ३ ८॥

Bhisma said— So also, Nakula, I have
faithfully communicated to you all I heard
from my pious friend, when he came from his
country of Kalinga to visit me. I have thus
explained to you, as was fitting, that there is
no protection in the ocean of the world except
Visnu; and that the servants and ministers of
Yama, the king of the dead himself and his
tortures, are all unavailing against one who
places his reliance on that divinity."

पराशर उवाच
एतन्मुने तवाख्यातं गीतं वैवस्वतेन यत्।
`तत्प्रश्नानुगतं wag किमन्यच्छोतुमिच्छसि।। ३९॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे सप्तमोऽध्याय:।।७॥

I have thus, resumed Pardagara, related to
you what you wished to hear and what was
said by the son of Vivasvat.? What else do you
wish to hear?

NOTES

1, Nakula is one of the Padndava princes and
consequently grand nephew, not grandson, of Bhis
ma; he is great grandson of PardSara; and it is rather

an anomaly for the latter to cite a conversation in
which Nakula formerly bore a part.

2. Or Yama and Niyama. The duties intended by
these terms are variously enumerated. The
commentator on the text specifies under the first
head, absence of violence or cruelty to other beings
(Ahirhsa), honesty (Asteya), truth (Satya), chastity
(Brahmacarya) and disinterestedness or non
acceptance of gifts (Aparigraha). Under Niyama are
comprehended purity (Sauca), contentment
(Santoga), devotion (Tapas), study of the Vedas
(Svadhyaya) and adoration of the supreme (Igvara-
pranidhdna).

3. Or Vaivasvata. This section is called the
Yama-gita.

KEKK
