494 THE VISNU-PURANAM
CHAPTER 30 सन्ध्या रात्रिरहोभूमिर्गमनं वायुरम्बु च।
त्रिंशोऽध्याय: हुताशनी मनो बुद्धिर्भूतादिस्त्वं तथाच्युत।। ९॥
रि सृष्टि-स्थिति-विनाशानां eat कर्त्त पतिर्भवान्।
( ब्रह्म-विष्णु-शिवाख्याभिरात्ममूर्तिभिरीश्वर।। १०॥
पराशर उवाच देवा यक्षास्तथा दैत्या राक्षसा: सिद्धपन्नगा:।
गरुडो वारुणं छत्रं तथैव मणिपर्वतम्। कुष्माण्डाश्च पिशाचाश्च Way मनुजास्तथा॥ ११॥

सभार्य्यञ्च हृषीकेश लीलयैव वहन् aah gn
उपतस्थुस्तथा SAT: सार्ध्यहस्ता जनार्द्दनम्।। २॥
स देवैरर्चित: कृष्णो देवमातुर्निवेशनम्। .
सिताभ्रशिखराकारं प्रविश्य ददूशेऽदितिम् ॥३॥
स तां प्रणम्य शक्रेण सह ते कुण्डलोत्तमे।

ददौ नरकनाशञ्च शशंसास्यै जनार्द्दन: ॥४॥
तत: प्रीता जगन्माता धातारं जगतां हरिम्।
तुष्टावादितिरव्यग्र कृत्वा त्वत्प्रवणं मन:।५॥

Garuda, laden with the umbrella of Varuna
and the jewel mountain, and bearing HrshikeSa
on his back to the court of Indra, went lightly.
as jf in sport, along. When they arrived at the
portals of Svarga, Hari blew his shell; on
which the gods advanced to meet him, bearing
respectful offerings. Having received the
homage of the divinities, Krsna went to the
palace of the mother of the gods, whose turrets
resembled white clouds; and on beholding
Aditi, paid his respects to her, along with
Sakra, and, presenting to her own earrings,
informed her of the destruction of the demon
Naraka. The mother of the world, well
pleased, then fixed her whole thoughts upon
Hari, the creator, and thus pronounced his
praise:

अदितिरुवाच
नमस्ते पुण्डरीकाक्ष!भक्तानामभयङ्कर।
सनातनात्मन् सर्वात्मन! भूतात्मन्! भूतभावन।। ६॥
त्रिगुणातीत। Fea! शुद्धसत्त्व! हृदि fermion
सितदीर्घादिनि:शेष-कल्पनापरिवर्जित।
जन्मादिभिरसंस्पृष्ट! स्वप्नादिपरिवर्जित॥। ci

पशवो मृगमातङ्गास्तथैव च सरीसृपा:।

वृक्ष-गुल्म-लता बह्वय: समस्तास्तृणजाततय:।॥१२॥

स्थूला मध्यास्तथा सूक्ष्मा: स्थूल-सूक्ष्मतण्श्च ये।

देहभेदा भवान् VS ये केचित् पुद्गलाश्रया: ॥१३॥

Glory to you, 0 god with the lotus eyes,
who removest all fear from those that worship
you. You are thé eternal, universal, and living
soul; the origin of all beings; the instigator of
the mental faculty, and faculties of sense; one
with the three qualities; beyond the three
qualities; exempt from contraries; pure;
existing in the hearts of all; void of colour,
extension, and every transient modification;
unaffected by the vicissitudes of birth or death,
sleep or walking. You are evening, night, and
day; earth, sky, air, water, and fire; mind,
intellect, and individuality. You are the agent
of creation, duration, and dissolution; the
master over the agent; in thy forms which are
called Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. You are gods,
Yaksas. Daityas, Raksasas, Siddhas, Punnagas,
Kitismandas, Pisachas, Gandharbas, men,
animals, deer, elephants, reptiles, trees, shrubs,
creepers, climbers, and grasses; all things,
large, middling, small, immense, or minute:
you are all bodies whatsover, composed of
aggregated atoms.

माया तवेयमज्ञात्तपरमार्थातिमोहिनी।
अनात्मन्यात्मविज्ञानं यया मूढो निरुध्यते es

This thy illusion beguiless all who are
ignorant of thy tme nature, the fools who
imagine soul to be in that which is not spirit.

अस्वे ममेति भावोऽत्र, यत् पुंसामुपजायते।
अहं ममेति भावोऽत्र यत् प्रायेणाभिजायते।

संसारमातुर्मायायास्तवैतन्नाथ। चेष्टितम्।। १५॥
