BOOK I, CHAP. 6

and formed villages and cities; and in them
erected appropriate dwellings, as defences
against the sun and the cold.‘Having thus
provided security against the weather, men
next began to employ themselves in manual
labour, as a means of livelihood, (and
cultivated) the seventeen kinds of useful

grain—rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum, ©

panic, and various sorts of Icntils, beans, and
pease.’

इत्येताश्चौषधीनान्तु ग्राम्याणां जातयो मुने।

ओषध्यो यज्ञियाश्चैव ग्राम्यारण्याश्चतुर्दश।। २३॥

ब्रीहय: Waar माषा गोधूमा अणवस्तिला:।

प्रियङ्गुसप्तमा ह्येता अष्टमास्तु कुलत्थका:॥२४॥

श्यामाकास्त्वथ नीवारा TACT: सगवेधुका:।

TAT वेणुयवा: प्रोक्तास्तद्दत् मर्कटका TN २५॥

ग्राप्यारण्या: स्मृता ह्येता ओषध्यस्तु चतुर्द्दश।

यज्ञनिष्पत्तये यज्ञस्तथासां हेतुरुत्तम:।। २६॥

एताश्च सह AA प्रजानां कारणं परम्।

परापरविद: प्राज्ञस्ततो यज्ञान् वितन्वते॥ Von

अहन्यहन्यनुष्ठानं यज्ञानां मुनिसत्तम।

उपकारकरं yar क्रियमाणस्य शान्तिदम्) २ ८)।

O sage! These are the kinds cultivated for
domestic use: but there are fourteen kinds
which may be offered in sacrifice; they are,
rice, barley, Masa, wheat, millet, and
sesamum; Priyangu is the seventh, and
kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are,
Syamaka, a sort of panic; Nivara, uncultivated
rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum; Gavedhuka
(coix); Markata, wild panic; and (a plant
called) the seed or barley of the Bamboo
(Venu-yava). These, cultivated or wild, are the
fourteen grains that were produced for
purposes of offering in sacrifice; and sacrifice
(the cause of rain) is their origin also: they
again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the
perpetuation of the human race, as those
understand who can discriminate cause and
effect. Thence sacrifices were offered daily;
the performance of which, oh best of Munis, is
of essential service to mankind, and expiates

37

the offences of those by whom they are
observed.

येषान्तु कालरूपोऽसौ पापविन्दुर्महामते।
चेत:सु TQ चक्रुस्ते न यज्ञेषु मानसम्॥२९॥
वेदवादांस्तथा Far यज्ञनिष्यादकं च यत्।
तत्सर्वं निन्दमानास्ते यज्ञव्यासेधकारिण:।॥ ३०॥
प्रवृतिमार्गव्युच्छित्तिकारिणो वेदनिन्दका:।
दुरात्मानो दुराचारा बभूवु: कुटिलाशया:॥३१॥

Those, however, in whose hearts the dross
of sin derived from Time (K&la) was still more
developed, assented not to sacrifices, but
reviled both them and all that resulted from
them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas.
Those abusers of the Vedas, of evil disposition
and conduct, and seceders from the path of
enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness.8

संसिद्धा arg aratat प्रजा: सृष्टा प्रजापति:।
मर्यादां रथापयामास यथास्थानं यथागुणम्॥३२॥
वर्णानामाश्रमाणाञ्च धर्मान् धर्मभृतां वर।

लोकांश्च सर्ववर्णानां weary धर्मानुपालिनाम्) ३३॥
स्थानमैन्द्रं क्षत्रियाणां सङ्गामेष्वनिवर्तिनाम्॥ ३४॥
गान्धर्वं शूद्रजातीनां परिचर्यानुवर्तिनाम्॥३५॥

The means of subsistence having been
provided for the beings he had created-
Brahma prescribed laws suited to their station
and faculties, the duties of the several castes
and orders, and the regions of those of the
different castes who were observant of their
duties. The heaven of the Pitrs is the region of
devout Brahmanas. The sphere of Indra, of Ks
atriyas who fly not from the field. The region
of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas who
are diligent in their occupations and
submissive. Sidras are elevated to the sphere
of the Gandharvas.

अष्टाशीतिसहस्राणि मुनीनामूर्ध्वरेतसाम्।

स्मृतं तेषां मरुत्स्थानं तदेव गुरुवासिनाम्।। ३६॥
सप्तर्षीणान्तु यत् स्थानं स्मृतं तद्वै वनौकसाम्।
प्राजापत्यं गृहस्थानां न्यासिनां ब्रह्मसंज्ञितम्।। ३७॥
