BOOK IV, 24

405

palpable blunders, although almost all the MSS.
agree in the reading. The chronology of the Vayu is
Abhiras, 67 years; Garddabhins, 72; Sakas, 380,
Yavanas, 82; Tusdras, 500 (all the copies of the
Matsya have 7000); Mariindas, 200; and Mlecchas,
intending perhaps Maunas, 300 years. Total 1601
years or less than 19 years to a reign. They are not
however continuous, but nearly contemporary
dynasties; and if they comprise, as they probably
do, the Greek and Scythian princes of the west of
India, the periods may not be very wide of the
truth. The Matsya begins the list with one more
dynasty, aother Andhra (see n. 39), of whom there
were seven : अन्ध्राणां संस्थिते राज्ये तेषां भृत्यान्वया नृपा:। सप्तैवान्ध्रा
भविष्यन्ति नवाभीरास्ततो नृपा:॥ ‘When the dominion of the
Andhras has ceased, there shall be seven other
Andhras, kings of the race of their servants; and
then nine Abhiras.' etc. The passage of the Vayu,
although somewhat similar in terms, has a different
purporse : अन्ध्राणां संस्थितानां च तेषां वंशा समा पुन:।
सप्तैवतुभविष्यन्ति-दशाभीरास्ततो नृपा:॥ "Of these, the Andhras
having passed away, there shall be seven
contemporary races; as, ten Abhiras.' The passage
is differently read in different copies, but this is the
only intelligible reading. At the same time it
subsequently specifies a period for the duration of
the Andhra dynasty different from that before given
or three hundred years, as if a different race was
referred to : अन्ध्रा sheafa aqui wa द्वै च wi च 41 ‘The
Andhras shall possess the earth two hundred years
and one hundred.’ The Matsya has twice five
hundred : arm श्रीपर्व्वतीयाश्च ते द्वै पञ्चशतं wa! ‘The
Sriparvatiya Andhras twice five hundred years.'
One MS. has more consistently fifty-two years :
द्विपंचाशतं समा:। But there is evidently something faulty
in all the MSS. The expression of the Matsya,
'Sriparvatiya Andhras,' is remarkable; Sriparvat
being in Telingana. There is probably some
confusion of the two races, the Magadha and
Tailinga kings, in these passages of the Puranas.
The Bhagavata has a dynasty of seven Andhra
kings, but of a different period (see n. 39). Wilfor
has attempted a verification of these dynasties; in
some instances perhaps with success, though
certainly not in all. The Abhiras he calls the
shepherd kings of the north of India : they were
more probably Greeks or Scythians or Parthians,
along the lower Indua : traces of the name occur, as
formelry observed, in the Abiria of Ptolemy and the

Ahirs as a distinct race still exist in Gujarat. Raish
Mehfil. The Sakas are the Sace and the duration of
their power is not unlikely to be near the truth. The
eight Yavana kings may be, as he suppose, Greek
princes of Bactria, or rather of western India. The
Tusaras he makes the Parthians. If the Bhagavata
has the preferable reading Tuskaras, they were the
Tocari, a Scythian race. The Muriindas, as he has it,
Maurundas, he considers to be a tribe of Huns, the
Morundae of Ptolemy. According to the Matsya
they were of Mleccha origin, Mleccha-sambhava.
The Vayu calls them Arya-mlecchas; quere,
Barbarians of Ariana. Wilford regards the Maunas
as also a tribe of Huns; and the word is in all the
MSS. of the Matsya, Hiinas; traces of whom may
be still found in the west and south of India.
Inscription at Merritch. Jour. R. As. Soc. Vol. प्रा. p.
103. The Garddabhins Wilford conjectures to be
descendants of Bahram Gor, king of Persia; but this
is very questionable. That they were a tribe in the
west of India may be conjectured, as some strange
tales prevail there of a Gandharva, changed to an
ass, marrying the daughter of the king of Dhar. As.
Res. VI. 35 and IX. 147; also 'Cutch' by Mrs.
Postans, p. 18 : fables suggested no doubt by the
name Garddabha, signifying as ass. There is also
evidently some affinity between these Garddabhins
and the old Gadhia Pysa or assmoney, as vulgarly
termed, found in various parts of western India and
which is unquestionably of ancient date. Journ. As.
Soc. Bengal, Dec. 1835, p. 688. It may be the
coinage of the Garddabha princes; Garddabha,
being the original of Gadha, meaning also an ass. I
have elsewhere conjectured the possibility of their
being current about a century and a half before our
era. Journ. R. As. Soc. Vol. Tl. 385. Tod, quoting a
parallel passage in Hindi, reads, instead of
Garddhabhin, Gor-ind, which he explains the
Indras or lords of Gor; but the reading is
undoubtedly erroneous.

65. The copies agree in reading Pauras, but the
commentator remarks that it is sometimes Maunas,
but they have already been specified; unless the
term be repeated in order to separate the duration of
this dynasty from that of the rest. Such seems to be
the purpose of the similar passage of the
Bhagavata. ‘These kings (Andhras etc.) will possess
the earth 1099 years and the eleven Maulas 300:' ud
भोक्ष्यन्ति पृथिवीं दशवर्षशतानि च नवाधिकां च नवतिं मौला एकादश-
