30

father of the world, the progenitors (the Pitrs)
were born from his side. The body, when he
abandoned it, became the Sandy4 (or evening
twilight), the interval between day and night.

रजोमात्रोत्मिकामन्यां जगृहे स तनुं तत:।

रजोमात्रोत्कटा जाता मनुष्या द्विजसत्तम।। ३५॥

तामप्याशु स तत्याज तनुं सद्य: प्रजापति:।

ज्योत्स्ना समभवत् सापि प्राकसनध्या याभिधीयते।। ३६॥

Brahma then assumed another person,

pervaded by the quality of foulness; and from
this, men, in whom foulness (or passion)
predominates, were produced. Quickly
abandoning that body, it became morning
twilight, or the dawn.

ज्योत्स्नायामेव बलिनो मनुष्या: पितरस्तथा।
भैत्रेय सन्ध्यासमये तस्मादेते भवन्ति वै।। ३७॥
ज्योत्स्ना रात्र्यहनी सन्ध्या चत्वार्य्यतानि वै प्रभो:।

ब्रह्मणस्तू शरीराणि त्रिगुणोपाश्रयाणि तु॥ ३८॥

At the appearance of this light of day, men
feel most vigour; while the progenitors are
most powcrful in the evening season. In this
manner, Maitreya, Jyotsné (dawn), Ratri
(night), Ahar (day), and Sandhya (evening),
are the four bodies of Brahma invested by the
three Qualities’®.

रजोमात्रात्मिकामेव तततोऽन्यां जगृहे तनुम्।
तत: YQ ब्रह्मणो जाता जज्ञे कोपस्तया त्तत्त:।। ३९॥

श्षुत्षामानन्धकारेऽथ सोऽसृजदू भगवांस्तत:।

विरूपा: VATE जातास्तेऽभ्यधावस्तत: प्रभुम्।४०

Ba भो रक्ष्यतामेष यैसक्तम् राक्षसास्तु ते।

HY: खादाम इत्यन्ये ये ते यक्षास्तु जक्षणात्।।४१॥

Next from Brahma, in a form composed of
the quality of foulness, was produced hunger,
of whom anger was born: and the god put forth
in darkness beings emaciate with hunger, of
hidcous aspects, and with long beards. Thosc
bcings hastened to the deity. Such of them as
exclaimed, Oh preserve us! were thence called
Raksasas’°: others, who cried out, Let us eat,
were denominated from that expression Yaks

{7
as.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अप्रियानथ तान् opt केशा: शीर्यन्त वेधस:।

. Serer शिरसो a: समारोहन्त तच्छिर:।। ४२॥
सर्पणात् तेऽभवन् सर्पा हीनत्वादहय: स्मृता:।
तत: क्रुद्धो जगत्सृष्टा क्रोधात्मनो विनिर्ममे।। ४३॥
वर्णेन कपिशेनोग्रा भूतास्ते पिशिताशना:।
धयन्तो गां समुत्पन्ना गन्धर्वास्तस्य तत्क्षणात्।॥४४॥
पिबन्तो जज्ञिरे ari गन्धर्वास्तेन ते fist

Beholding them so disgusting, the hairs of
Brahma were shrivelled up, and first falling
from his head, were again renewed upon it:
from their falling they became serpents, called
Sarpa from their creeping, and Ahi because
they had deserted the head.'* The creator of
the world, being incensed, then created fierce
beings, who were denominated goblins,
Bhitas, malignant fiends and eaters of flesh.
The Gandharvas were next born. imbibing
melody drinking of the goddess of speech,
they were born, and thence their appellation”

एतानि GET भगवान् ब्रह्मा तच्छक्तिनोदित:॥४५॥

तत: स्वच्छन्दतोऽन्यानि वयांसि वयसोऽसृजत्।

अवयो वक्षसश्चक्रे मुखतोऽजा: स PEARL etl
BEATS गाश्च पार्श्वभ्यां च प्रजापति;।

पद्भ्यामश्वान् समातज्ञान् शरभान् WAIL, भृगान्।।४७॥
ओषध्य: फलमूलिन्यो रोमभ्यस्तस्य जज्ञिरे।। ४८॥

The divine Brahma, influenced by their
material energies, having created these beings,
made others of his own will. Birds he formed
from his vital vigour; sheep from his breast,
goats from his mouth; kine from his belly and
sides; and horses, elephants, Sarabhas,
Gavayas, deer, camels, mules, antelopes, and
other animals, trom his feet: whilst from the
hairs of his body sprang herbs, roots, and
fruits.

त्रेतायुगमुखे gan कल्पस्यादौ द्विजोत्तम।

UBT पश्चोषधी: सम्यग् युयोज स तदाध्वरे।।४९॥
TS: पुरुषा मेषा अश्वा अश्वतरा: खरा:।

`एतान् ग्राम्यान् प्रशून् प्राहुरारण्यांश्च निबोध Any ot
