BOOK IV, 13

367

Between these two Krsna considered himself
as an ox between the two wheels of a cart and
thus spoke to Akrira in the presence of all the
Yadavas : "This jewel has been exhibited to
the assembly in order to clear my reputation; it
is the joint right of Balabhadra and myself and
is the patrimonial inheritance of Satyabhama.
But this jewel, to be of advantage to the whole
kingdom, should be taken charge of by a
person who leads a life of perpetual
continence : If wom by an impure individual,
it will be the cause of his death.

अतोऽहमस्य षोडशस्त्रीसहस्रपरिग्रहदसमर्थो
धारणे।। ६ ९॥

मदिरापानाद्यशेषोपभोगपरित्याग:र at कार्य:। तदयं
यदुलोकोऽयं बलभद्रोऽहं सत्या च त्वां दानपते। प्रार्थयाम:,
एतद् ware धारयितं समर्थ:) त्वत्स्थञ्चास्य
राष्ट्रस्योपकारकं, तद्भवानशेषराष्टोपकारनिमित्तमेतत् पूर्ववद्
धारयतु। त्वयान्यथा न वक्तव्यमित्युक्ते

जग्राह तन्महामणिरत्नम्। aa: प्रभृति चाक्रूर: प्रकटेनैवातीव
तेजसा जाज्वल्यमानेनात्मकण्ठासक्तेनादित्य इवांशुमाली
चचार।७०॥

Now as I have sixteen thousand wives, I
am not qualified to have the care of it. It is not
likely that Satyabhéma will agree to the
conditions that would entitle her to the
possession of the jewel; and as to Balabhadra,
he is too much addicted to wine and the
pleasures of sense to lead a life of self-denial.
We are therefore out of the question and all
the YAdavas, Balabhadra, Satyabhama and
myself, request you, most bountiful Akrira, to
retain the care of the jewel, as you have done
hitherto, for the general good; for you are
qualified to have the keeping of it and in your
hands it has been productive of benefit to the
country. You must not decline compliance
with our request." Akrira, thus urged,
accepted the jewel and thenceforth wore it
publicly round his neck, where it shone with
dazzling brightness; and Akrira moved about
like the sun, wearing a garland of light.

इत्येतां भगवतो मिथ्याभिशस्तिक्षालनां : स्मरति, न तस्य
कदाचिदल्पापि मिथ्याभिशस्तिर्भवति, अव्याहतेन्द्रियश्चा-
ख्रिलपापमोक्षमवाप्नोति।७ en
इति श्रीविष्णुषुराणे चतुर्थांशे त्रयोदश: अध्याय:॥

He who calls to mind the vindication of the
character of Krsna from false aspersions, shall
never become the subject of unfounded
accusation in the least degree and living in the

full exercise of his sense shall be cleansed
from every sin.'*

NOTES

1. The Agni acknowledges but four sons, but all
the rest agree in the number and mostly in the
names, Mahabhoja is sometimes read Mahabhaga.

2. Krmi : Brahma, Agni, Kirma.

3. Panava : Vayu. Kramana : Brahma. Krpana :
Padma. Kinkina : Bhagavata.

4. Dhrsthi : Bhagavata, Brahma.

5. The Brahma and Hari Vamsa add to the first
three Stra and Puraiijaya and to the second Dasaka.

6. By the Parnas4 river : Brahma Purana : a
river in Malva.

7. These are made incorrectly the descendants
of Babhru in the Hari Varhéa.

8. The Bhagavata, Matsya and Vayu agree in
the main, as to the genealogy that follows, with our
text. The Vayu states that Vrsni had two wives,
Madri and Gandhari by the former he had Yudhajit
and Anamitra and by the latter Sumitra and
Devamidhusa. The Matsya also names the ladies,
but gives Sumitra to Gandhari and makes Madri the
mother of Yudhajit, Devamidhusa, Anamitra and
Sini. The Agni has a similar arrangement, but
substitutes Dhrsta for Vrsni and makes him the
fifteenth in descent from Satvata. The Linga,
Padma, Brahma Purana and Hari Varnsa have made
great confusion by altering, apparently without any
warrant, the name of Vrsni of Krostri.

9. The Bhagavata makes them sons of Yudhajit;
the Matsya and Agni, as observed in the preceding
note, his brothers as well as Sumitra's.

10. This alludes to events detailed in the
Mahabharata.

11. The Vayu calls Sudhanvan or Satadhanvan
king of Mithila.
