BOOK VI, CHAP. 8

563

CHAPTER 8
अष्टटमोऽध्याय:
(शिष्यपरम्पराकथनम्, विष्णुपुराणस्य माहात्स्यमुपसंहारश्च।))

पराशर उवाच
इत्येष कथित: way Tete: प्रतिसञ्चर:।
आत्यन्तिको विमुक्तिर्या लयो ब्रह्मणि शाश्वते॥ १॥
सर्गश्च प्रतिसर्गश्च वंशो मन्वन्तराणि च।
वंशानुचरितं चैव भवतो गदितं मया।। २॥
विशिष्टं wagers: पुरुषार्थोपपादकम्॥ ३॥
तुभ्यं यथावन्मैत्रेय! प्रोक्तं शुश्रूषवेऽव्ययम्।
यदन्यदपि वक्तव्यं तत् पृच्छाद्य वदामि Avi

Paragara said- I have now explained to
you, Maitreya, the third kind of worldly
dissolution, or that which is absolute and final,
which is, liberation and resolution into eternal
spirit! I have related to you primary and
secondary creation, the families of the
patriarchs, the periods of the Manvantaras, and
the genealogical histories (of the kings). I have

hearing it, the imperishable Vaishnava Purana,
which is destructive of all sins, the most
excellent of all holy writings, and the means of
attaining the great end of man. If there is any
thing else you wish to hear, propose your
question, and I will answer it.

भैत्रेय उवाच
भगवन्! कथितं wd यत् पृष्टोऽसि मया मुने।
श्रुतञ्चैतन्मया भक्त्या नान्यत् प्रष्टव्यमस्ति TG
त्वत्प्रसादान्मया ज्ञाता उत्पत्ति-स्थिति-संयमा:॥ ६॥

ज्ञातश्चतुर्विधो राशि: शक्तिंश्च त्रिविधा गुरो!
विज्ञाता चापि कात्सर्न्यन त्रिविधा भावभावना।। ७॥
त्वत्प्रसादान्मया ज्ञातं ज्ञेयमन्यैरलं द्विज।
यथैतदखिलं विष्णोर्जगन्न व्यतिरिच्यते॥ ८॥

Maitreya said— Holy teacher, you have
indeed related to me all that I wished to know,
and I have listened to it with pious attention. I
have nothing further to inquire. The doubts
inseparable from the mind of man have all
been resolved by you, and through your
instructions I am acquainted with the origin,
duration, and end of all things; with Visnu in
his collective fourfold form’; his three
energies’; and with the three modes of
apprehending the object of contemplation‘. Of
all this have I acquired a knowledge through
your favour, and nothing else is worthy to be
known, when it is once understood that Visnu
and this world are not mutually distinct.

कृतार्थोऽस्म्यपसन्देह-स्त्वत्प्रसादान्महामुने!

वर्णधर्मादयो eat विदिता यदशेषत:॥ ९॥

प्रवृतञ्च Aqua ज्ञातं at मयाखिलम्।

wate विप्रप्रवर। नान्यत् प्रष्टव्यमस्ति मे।। १०॥

यदस्य कथनायासैर्योजितोऽसि मया गुरो।

तत् क्षम्यतां विशेषोऽस्ति न सुतां पुत्र-शिष्ययो:।। ११॥

0 Great Muni, I have obtained through

your kindness all I desired, the dissipation of

my doubts, since you have instructed me in the
duties of the several tribes, and in other

repeated to you, in short, who were desirous of obligations; the nature of active life, and
