536

THE VISNU-PURANAM

CHAPTER 3

तृतीयोऽध्याय:

(निमेषादिकालमानस्य नैमित्तिकप्रलयस्य च वर्णनम्)
पराशरं उवाच

नैमित्तिक: प्राकृतिकस्तथैवात्यन्तिको मत:।। १

ब्राह्मो नैमित्तिकस्तेषां कल्पान्ते प्रतिसञ्चर:।

आत्यन्तिकश्च मोक्षाख्य: प्राकृतो द्विपराद्धिक:॥ २॥

The dissolution of existing beings is of
three kinds, incidental, elemental and
absolute'. The incidental is that which relates
to Brahma, and occurs at the end of a Kalpa:
the elemental is that which takes place after
two Pararddhas: the absolute is final liberation
from existence.

मैत्रेय उवाच
परार्द्धसंख्यां भगवन्! ममाचक्ष्व यया तु स:।
द्विगुणीकृतया ज्ञेय: प्राकृत: प्रतिसञ्जर:।। ३॥

Maitreya said— Tell me, excellent master,
what is the enumeration of a Pararddha, the
expiration of two of which is the period of
elemental dissolution’.

WR उवाच

स्थानात् स्थानं दशगुणमेकस्माद् गण्यते द्विज।
ततोऽष्टादशमे स्थाने परार्द्धमभिधीयते॥४॥
तदाव्यक्तेऽखिलं व्यक्तं स्वहेतौ लयमेति वै॥ ५॥
निमेषो मानुषो योऽयं मात्रामात्रप्रमाणत:।

तै: पञ्चदशभि: काष्ठा त्रिंशत् काष्ठास्तथा कला:॥६॥
नाडिका तु प्रमाणेन कला दश च पञ्च च।
उन्मानेनाम्भस: सा तु पलान्यर्द्धत्रयोदश।। ७॥

हेममाषै: कृतच्छिद्रश्चतुर्भिश्चतुरङ्गलै:।

भागधेन प्रमाणेन जलप्रस्थस्तु स स्मृत:॥८॥
अहोरात्रं मुहूर्ततास्तु त्रिंशन्मासो दिनैस्तथा।। ९॥
मासैर्ददादशभिर्वर्षैमहोरात्रन्तु तद्दिवि।
त्रिभिर्वर्षशतैर्वर्षं षष्ट्या चैवासुरद्विषाम्।। १०॥
तैस्तु द्वादशसाहस्रं चतुर्युगमुदाहतम्।
चतुर्युगसहस्रन्तु कथ्यते ब्रह्मणो दिनम्।। ११॥|

स कल्पोऽप्यत्र WAIVE महामुने।
aed चैव मैत्रेय! ब्राह्मो नैमित्तिको लय:। १२॥

तस्य स्वरूपमत्युग्रं Wa गदतो मम।
STOPS Wat भूयस्तव वक्ष्याम्यहं CAT १३॥
Paragara continued— A _ Pararddha,

Maitreya, is that number which occurs in the
eighteenth place of figures, enumerated
according to the rule of decimal notation’. At
the end of twice that period elemental
dissolution occurs, when all the discrete
products of nature are withdrawn into their
indiscrete source. The shortest period of time
is a Matra, which is equal to the twinkling of
the human eye. Fifteen Matras make a Kastha;
thirty Kasthas, one Kala; fifteen Kalas, one
Nadika. A Nadika is ascertained by a measure
of water, with a vessel made of twelve Palas
and a half of copper, in the bottom of which
there is to be a hole made with a tube of gold,
of the weight of four M4sas, and four inches
long‘. According to the Magadha measure, the
vessel should hold a Prastha (or sixteen Palas)
of water. Two of these Nadis make one
Muhirtta; thirty of which are one day and
night. Thirty such periods form a month;
twelve months make a year, or a day and night
of the gods; and three hundred and sixty such
days constitute a year of the celestials. An
aggregate of four ages contains twelve
thousand divine years; and a thousand periods
of four ages complete a day of Brahma. That
period is also termed a Kalpa, during which
fourteen Manus preside; and at the end of it
occurs the incidental or Brahma dissolution.
