BOOK IV, 1

Overcome with astonishment and alarm,
the Raja then said to Brahma, "Since I am thus
circumstanced, do you, lord, tell me unto
whom the maiden shall be given:" and the
creator of the world, whose throne is the lotus,
thus benignantly replied to the prince, as he
stood bowed and humble before him :

ब्रह्मोवाच

न ह्यादिमध्यान्तमजस्य यस्य

विद्मो वयं सर्व्वगतस्य धातु:।
न च स्वरूपं न परं स्वभावं

न चैव सारं परमेश्वरस्य।। २६॥

"The being of whose commencement,
course and termination, we are ignorant; the
unborn and omnipresent essence of all things,
he whose real and infinite nature and essence
we do not know-—is the supreme Visnu.

कलामुहूर्त्तदिमयश्च कालो
न ag विभूते: परिणामहेतु:।
अजन्मनाशस्य समस्तमूर्त्त-
रनामरूंपस्य सनातनस्य।। २७॥

He is time, made up of moments and hours
and years; whose influence is the source of
perpetual change. He is the universal form of
all things, birth to death. He is eternal, without
name or shape.

यस्य प्रसादादहमच्चुतस्य
भूत: प्रजासृष्टिकरोऽन्तकारी।
. PART मध्ये पुरुष: परस्मात्।। २८॥

Through the favour of that imperishable
being am I the agent of his power in creation :
through his anger is Rudra the destroyer of the
world; and the cause of preservation, Purusa,
proceeds also from him.

मदूपमास्थाय सृजत्यजो य:

स्थितौ च योऽसौ पुरुषस्वरूपी।
रुद्रस्वरूपेण च योऽत्ति विश्वं

धत्ते तथानन्तवपु: समस्तम्।। २९॥

301

The unborn having assumed my person
creates the world; in his own essence he
provides for its duration; in the form of Rudra
he devours all things; and with the body of
Ananta he upholds them.

शक्रादिरूपी परिपाति विश्च-

मर्केन्दुरूपश्च तमो हिनस्ति।
पाकाय योऽग्नित्वमुपेत्य लोकान्

बिभर्ति पृथ्वीवपुरव्ययात्मा।। ३०॥

Impersonated as Indra and the other gods
he is the guardian of mankind; and as the sun
and moon he disperses darkness. Taking upon
himself the nature of fire he bestows warmth
and maturity; and in the condition of the carth
nourishes all beings.

चेष्टां करोति श्वसनस्वरूपी

लोकस्य तृप्तिञ्च जलस्वरूपी।
ददाति विश्वस्थितिसंस्थितस्तु
सर्वावकाशञ्च नभ:स्वरूपी।। ३ १॥।

As one with air he gives activity to
existence; and as one with water he satisfies
all wants; while in the state of ether,
associated with universal aggregation, he
furnishes space for all objects.

a: सृज्यते सर्गकृदात्मनैव

य: पाल्यते पालयिता च देव:।
विश्लात्मन: संह्रियतेऽन्तकारी

पृथङ् न यस्यास्य च योऽव्ययात्मा।। ३ २॥

He is at once the creator, and that which is
created; the preserver and that which is
preserved; the dcstroyed and as one with all
things, that which is destroyed; and as the
indestructible, he is distinct from these thrce
vicissitudes.

यस्मिन् जगदू यो जगदेतदाद्यो
यश्चाश्रितोऽस्मिन् जगति स्वयम्भू:।
स सर्वभूतप्रभवो धरित्र्यां
स्वांशेन विष्णुर्नृपतेऽवतीर्ण:।। 3 ३॥

In him is the world, he is the world; and he,
the primeval self-born, is again present in the
world. That mighty Visnu, who is paramount
