THE VISNU-PURANAM

सन्ध्यासन्ध्यांशयोरन्तर्य: कालो मुनिसत्तम।
युगाख्य: स तु विज्ञेय: कृतत्रेतादिसंज्ञित:॥ १४॥

कृतं त्रेता द्वापरञ्च कलिश्चैव चतुर्युगम्।

प्रोच्यते aq सहस्रञ्च Teo दिवसं मुने।। १५॥

ब्रह्मणो दिवसे ger! मनवश्च चतुर्द्दश।

भवन्ति परिमाणञ्च Tat कालकृतं शृणु॥ १६॥

Oh best of sages! fifteen twinklings of the
eye make a Kastha; thirty Kasthds, one Kala;
and thirty Kalds, one Muhirtta’. Thirty
Muhirttas constitute a day and night of
mortals: thirty such days make a month,
divided into two half-months: six months form
an Ayana (the period of the sun's progress
north or south of the ecliptic): and two Ayanas
compose a year. The southern Ayana is a night
and the northern a day, of the gods, Twelve
thousand divine years, each composed of
(three hundred and sixty) such days, constitute
the period of the four Yugas, or ages. They are
thus distributed: the Krta age has four
thousand divine years; the Treté three
thousand; the Dvapara two thousand, and the
Kali age one thousand: so those acquainted
with antiquity have declared. The period that
precedes a Yuga is called a Sandya, and it is of
as many hundred years as there are thousands
in the Yuga: and the period that follows a
Yuga, termed the Sandydmsa, is of similar
duration. The interval between the Sandya and
the Sandyamsa is the Yuga, denominated Krta,
Tretd, etc. The Krta, Treta, Dvdpara, and Kali
constitute a great age, or aggregate of four
ages: a thousand such aggregates are a day of
Brahma, and fourteen Manus reign within that
term. Hear the division of time which they
measure’.

सप्तर्षय: सुरा: शक्रो मनुस्तत्सूनवो नृपा:।
एककाले fe सृज्यन्ते संह्रियन्ते च पूर्ववत्॥ १८ ।।
भन्वन्तरं मनो: काल: सुरादीनाञ्च सत्तम।। १८॥
अष्टौ शतसहस्राणि दिव्यया संख्यया गति:।
द्वापञ्चाशत् तथान्यानि सहस्राण्यधिकानि च।। १९॥

सप्तषष्टिस्तथान्यानि नियुतानि महामुने।। 2011

विंशतिश्च सहस्राणि कालोऽयमधिकं विना।

मन्वन्तरस्य संख्येयं मानुषैर्वत्सरैद्विज।। २ Ul

चतुर्दशगुणो VI कालो ब्राह्ममह: स्मृतम्।
Bratt नैमित्तिको ,नाम तस्यान्ते प्रतिसञ्जर:॥ २ २॥
तदा हि cat सर्वं त्रैलोक्यं भूर्भुवादिकम्।

Seven Rsis, certain (secondary) divinities,
Indra, Manu, and the kings his sons, are
created and perish at one period’; and the
interval, called a Manvantara, is equal to
seventy-one times the number of years
contained in the four Yugas, with some
additional years: this is the duration of the
Manu, the (attendant) divinities, and the rest,
which is equal to 852,000 divine years, or to
306,720,000 years of mortals, independent of
the additional period,. Fourteen times this
period constitutes a Brahma day, that is, a day
of Brahma; the term (Brahma) being the
derivative form. At the end of this day a
dissolution of the universe occurs, when all the
three worlds, earth, and the regions of space,
are consumed with fire.

जनं प्रयान्ति ataral महर्लोकनिवासिन:।। २३॥
एकार्णवे तु त्रैलोक्ये ब्रह्मा नारायणात्मक:।
भोगिशय्यागत: शेते त्रैलोक्यग्रासबृंहित:॥ २४॥
जनस्थैर्योगिभिर्देवश्चिन्त्यमानोऽव्जसम्भव:।
तत्प्रमाणां fe at रात्रिं तदन्ते सृज्यते पुन:।। २५॥
एवन्तु ब्रह्मणो वर्षमेवं वर्षशतं च यत्।
wre हि wee वर्षाणां परमायुर्महात्मन:। २६॥
एकमस्य व्यतीतन्तु परार्द्ध ब्रह्मणोऽनघ।
तस्यान्तेऽभून्महाकल्य: Wer इत्यभिधीयते।। २७॥
द्वितीयस्य परार्द्धस्य वर्त्तमानस्य वै द्विज।
वाराह इति कल्पोऽयं प्रथम: परिकीर्तित:।॥ २८॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे तृतीय: अध्याय:।
The dwellers of Maharloka (the region
inhabited by the saints who survive the world),
distressed by the heat, repair then to Janaloka

(the region of holy men after their decease).
When the three worlds are but one mighty
