300

Bandhumat; his son was Vegavat; his son was
Budha;”? his son was Trmavindu, who had a
daughter named Ilavila.** The celestial nymph
Alambus& becoming enamoured of Trnavindu,
bore him a son named Visala, by whom the
city Vaisali was founded.” The son of the first
king of Vaisali was Hemacandra; his son was
Sucandra; his son was Dhamrasva; his son was
Sriijaya;”* his son was Sahadeva;”’ his son was
Krisasva; his son was Somadatta, who
celebrated ten times the sacrifice of a horse;
his son was Janamejaya; and his son was
Sumati.”*

तृणविन्दो: प्रसादेन सर्वे वैशालका नृपा:।
दीर्घायुषो महात्मानो वीर्यवन्तोऽतिधामिंका:॥ १९॥

These were the king of Vaisali; of whom it
is said, "By the favour of Trnavindu all the
monarchs of Vaisali; were long lived,
magnanimous, equitable and valiant."

Wale: कन्या सुकन्या नामाभवत्, यामुपयेमे च्यवन:।
आनर्त्तश्च नाम धाम्मिक: शर्यातिपुत्रोऽभवत्। आनर्त्तस्यापि
रेवतो नाम पुत्रो जज्ञे, योऽसावानर्त्तविषयं बुभुजे, पुरीञ्च
कुश स्थलीमध्युवास। रेवतस्यापि रैवत: ya: ककुद्मी नाम
धर्मात्मा भ्रातृशतज्येष्ठोऽभवत्। तस्य च रेवती नाम कन्या।
तामादाय कस्येयमर्हतीति भगवन्तमळ्जयोनिं प्रष्टुं ब्रह्मलोकं
जगाम। तावच्च ब्रह्मणोऽन्तिके हाहाहूहूसंज्ञाभ्यां
गन्धर्वाभ्यामतितानं नाम feet गान्धर्वमगीयत।॥ २०॥

तावच्च त्रिमार्गपरिवर्त्तरनेकयुगपरिव्रत्ति तिष्ठन्नपि रैवतक:

श्वृण्वन् मुहूर्त्तमिव मेने।। २१॥

Saryati, the fourth son of the Manu, had a
daughter named Sukany4, who was married to
the holy sage Cyavana;” he had also a
righteous son, Called Anartta. The son of the
latter was Revata,””’ who ruled over the country
called after his father Anartta and dwelt at the
capital denominated Kuégasthalt.*' The son of
this prince was Raivata or Kakudmin, the
eldest of a hundred brethren. He had a very
lovely daughter and not finding any one
worthy of her hand, he repaired with her to the
region of Brahm to consult the god where a
fit bridegroom was to be met with. When he
arrived, the quiristers Haha, Htht and others,

THE VISNU-PURANAM

were singing before Brahma and Raivata,
waiting till they had finished, imagined the
ages that elapsed during their performance to
be but as a moment.

कन्यायोग्यं वरमपृच्छत्। we wan, कथय
योऽभिमतस्ते oat इति। पुनश्च प्रणम्य भगवते
यथाभिमतानात्मन: स वरान् कथयामास, क एषां
भगवतोऽभिमत:? wea कन्यामिमां प्रयच्छामीति। a:
किञ्चिदवनतशिरा: समस्मितो भगवान् अब्जयोनिराह।। २२॥

At the end of their singing, Raivata
prostrated himself before Brahma and
explained his errand, "Whom should you wish
for a son-in-law?” demanded Brahméa; and the
king mentioned to him various persons with
whom he could be well pleased. Nodding his
head gently and graciously smiling, Brahma
said to him,

ये एते भगवतोऽभिमता: नैतेषां साम्प्रतम्रपत्यापत्य-
सन्ततिरप्यवनीतलेऽस्ति। बहूनि fe ततवात्रैतद् गान्धर्वं
शृण्वतश्चतुर्युगा यतीतानि। साम्प्रतं भूतलेऽष्टाविंशतितमस्य
मनोश्चतुर्युगमतीतप्रायम्, seat fe तत्कलि:। अन्यस्मै
कन्यारत्नमिदं भवतैकाकिना देयम्।। २३॥
कालेनैतेनात्यन्तमतीता:॥ २४॥

"Of those whom you have named the third
or fourth generation non longer survives, for
many successions of ages have passed away
while you were listening to our songsters; now
upon earth the twenty-eighth great age of the
present Manu is nearly finished and the Kali
period is at hand. You must therefore, bestow
this virgin gem upon some other husband, for
you are now alone and your friends, your
ministers servants, wife, kinsmen, armies and
treasures, have long since swept away by the
hand of time."

पुनरप्युत्पन्नसाध्वस: स राजा भगवन्तं प्रणम्य पप्रच्छ,
भगवन्! एवमवस्थिते ममेयं कस्मै देयेति। aa: स भगवान्

TEU २५॥
