326

THE VISNU-PURANAM

गर्भाधानं चकार। यदा च सप्त वर्षाण्यसौ गर्भो न जज्ञे,
ततस्तं गर्भमश्मना देवी जघान। पुत्रश्लाजायत। तस्य चाश्मक

एव नामाभवत्। अश्मकस्य मूलको नाम पुत्रोऽभवत्। योऽसौ

thus acquired the friendship of the deities in
heaven, they desired him to demand a boon.
He said to them, "If a boon is to be accepted
by me, then tell me, as a favour, what is the
duration of my life?" "The length of your life
is but an hour," the gods replied. On which,

परिवार्य्य रक्षित:। ततस्तं नारीकवचमुदाहरन्ति। मूलकाद् Khatvanga, who was swift of motion,
दशरथ:, तस्मादिलिविल:। wer fagas:, तस्माच्च descended in his easy-gliding chariot to the

खट्वाङ्गो दिलीप:। योऽसौ देवासुराणां सङ्गामे
देवताभिरभ्यर्थितोऽसुरान् जघान। स्वर्गे च कृतप्रियैर्देवैर्वरार्थं
चोदित: owe, - यद्यवश्यं at ग्राह्यस्तन्ममायु:
कथ्यतामिति। अनन्तरञ्चैतैरूक्तम्-एकमुहूर्त्तप्रमाणमायु।
इत्युक्तोऽस्खलितगतिना विमानेन लघिमगुणो
भर्त्यलोकमागम्याह,--यथा न ब्राह्मणेभ्य: सकाशादात्मापि मे
न च सकलदेवमानुष-पशु-व्रक्षादिकेऽप्यच्युतव्यतिरेकवती
भगवन्तमस्खलितगतिरद्य प्रापयेयमित्यशेषदेवगुरौ

स्यवपपि : नि
वासुदेवे युयोज, तत्रैव लयमवाप।। ३ ८॥

At the expiration of the period of his curse
Saud4sa returned home. Being reminded of the
imprecation of the Brahmani by his wife
Madayanti, he abstained from conjugal
intercourse and was in consequence childless;
but having solicited the interposition of Vasist
ha, Madayanti became pregnant. The child,
however, was not born for seven years, when
the queen, becoming impatient, divided the
womb with a sharp stone and was thereby
delivered. The child was then called ASmaka
(from Asmana, 'a stonc'), The son of ASmaka
was Milaka, who, when the warrior tribc was
extirpated upon earth, was surrounded and
concealed by a number of females; whence he
was denominated Narikavaca (having women
for armour)’, The son of Milaka was
Dasaratha; his son was Ilavila; his son was
Visvasaha; his son was Khatvanga, called also
Dilipa!’, who in a battle between the gods and
the Asuras, being called by the former to their
succour, killed a number of the latter. Having

world of mortals. Arrived there, he prayed,
and said, "If my own soul has nevcr been
dearer to me than the sacred Brahmanas, if I
have never deviated from the discharge of my
duty; if I have never regarded gods, men,
animals, vegetables, all created things, as
different from the imperishable; then may I,
with unswerving step, attain to that divine
being on whom holy sages meditate!" Having
thus spoken, he was united with that supreme
being, who is Vasudeva; with that elder of all
the gods, who is abstract existence and whose
form cannot be described. Thus he obtained
absorption, according to this stanza, which
was repeated formerly by the seven Rsis;
"Like unto Khatvanga will be no one upon
earth, who having come from heaven and
dwelt an hour amongst men, became united
with the three worlds by his liberality and
knowledge of truth'*."

तत्रापि श्रूयते श्लोको गीत: सप्तर्षिभि: पुरा।

खट्वाङ्गेन समो नान्य: aargeat भविष्यति।।

येन स्वर्गादिहागत्य मुहूर्त्त प्राप्य जीवितम्।

त्रयोऽभिसंहिता लोका बुद्ध्या दानेन चैव हि॥३९॥

खट्वाङ्गतो दीर्घबाहु: पुत्रोऽभवत्। ततो रघु: तस्मादप्यज:
अजाद् aera: दशरथस्यापि श्रीभगवान् अब्जनाभो
चतुर्दध पुत्रत्वमयासीत्।। ४०॥

रामोऽपि aa wa विश्वामित्रयज्ञरक्षणय गच्छंस्ताडकां
जघान।।४१॥
क्षयमनयत्। सन्दर्शनमात्रेणैवाहल्यामपापां चकार। जनकगृहे
जनकराजतनयां वीर्य्यशुल्कां लेभे॥४२॥
