BOOK I, CHAP. 2

15

known. Citi is that by which the consequences of
acts and species of knowledge are selected for the
use of soul. Smriti is the faculty of recognising all
things, past, present, or to come. Samvit is that in
which all things are found or known, and which is
found or known in all things: and Vipura is that
which is free from the effects of contrarieties, as of
knowledge and ignorance, and the like. Mahat is
also called Isvara, from, its exercising supremacy
over all things; Bhava, from its elementary
existence : Eka. or 'the one’, from its singleness;
Purusa, from its abiding within the body; and from
its being ungenerated it is called Swayambhu.,”
Now in this nomenclature we have chiefly two sets
of words; one, as Manas, Buddhi, Mali, signifying
mind, intelligence, knowledge, wisdom, design .
and the other, as Brahma, Ivara, etc., denoting an
active creator and ruler of the universe: as the Vayu
adds. Wet ofS विकुरुते चोद्यमान: सिसृक्षया । 'Mahat,
impclled by the desire to create, causes various
creation:, and the Mahabharata has महान् ससर्जाहंकारं।
‘Mahat created Ahamkara.' The Puranas generally
employ the same expression, attributing to Mahat
or Intelligence the act of creating. Mahat is
thereforc the divine mind in creative operation, the
vovgodiaxoojyiov TE xat navTov aitTog of
Anaxagoras, ‘an ordering and disposing mind.
which was the cause of all things., The word itself
suggests some relationship to the Phoenician Mot,
which, like Mahat. was the first product of the
mixture of spirit and matter, and the first rudiment
of creation: “Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus
prodit mot........ hine seminium omnis creature et
omniuin rerum creatio.” Brucker, I. 240. Mot. it is
true, appears to be a purely material substance,
whilst Mahat is an incorporeal substance; but they
agree in their place in the cosmogony, and are
something alike in name. How far also the
Phoenician system has been accurately described, is
matter of uncertainty. See Samkhya Karika. p. 83.
23. The scnse of Ahankara cannot be very well
rendered by any European term. It means the
principle of individual existence, that which
appropriates perceptions, and on which depend the
notions, I think. 1 feel. I am. It might be expressed
by the proposition of Descartes reversed: “Sum
ergo cogito, sentio.” etc. The equivalent emyloyed
by Colebrooke, egotism, has the advantage of an
analogous etymology, Ahankara being derived

from Aham (अहं), I,’ as in the Hari Varga: अहं त्विति
सहोवाच प्रजा: स्रयामि भारत। ‘He (Brahma), oh Bharata,
said, I will create creatures,’ Sec also Samkhya
Karika, p. 91. These three varities of Ahankara are
also described in the Samkhya Karika, p. 92.
Vaikarika, that which is productive, is the same as
the Satvika, or that which is combined with the
property of goodness. Taijasa Ahankara is that
which is endowed with Tejas, ‘heat, or 'cnergy,' in
consequence of its having the property of Rajas,
‘passion’ or ‘activity;' and the third kind. Bhiitadi. or
‘elementary,’ is the Tamasa. or has the property of
darkness. From the first kind proceed the sense;
from the last, the rudimental unconscious elements
: both kinds, which are equally of themselves inert,
being rendered productive by the cooperation of the
second, the energetic or active modification of
Ahankara. which is therefore said to be the origin
of both the senscs and the elements.

24. The successive series of rudiments and
elements, and their respectively engendering the
rudimcuts and elements next in the order, occur in
most of the Puranas, in nearly the same words. The
Brhannaradiya Purana observes, यथाक्रमं

at ‘They (the elements) in
successive order acquire the property of causality
one to the other.’ The order is also the same; or
other akdsa), wind or air (vayu). fire or light (tejas),
water and earth : except in one passage of the
Mahabharata (Moksa Dharma, c. 9). where it is
ether, water, fire, air. earth, The order of
Empedocles was ether, fire, earth, water, air.
Cudworth, 1. 97. The investment (avarana) of each
element by its own rudiment, and of each rudiment
by its preceding gross and rudimental elements, is
also met with in most of the chief Puranas. as the
Vayu, Padma. Linga, and Bhagavata; and traces of
it are found amongst the ancient cosmogonists : for
Anaximander supposed, that 'when the world was
made. a certain sphere or flame of fire, separated
from mattcr (the Infinite), encompassed the air,
which invested the earth as the bark does a tree;'
Kara Ty WEVULV TOVOE TOV KOOLLOV GTOKPIYTVaL.
kat tiva ék tovtov dAoyos abaipav mepi~
१४४0 Ta TEpt THY ५४ aEpL, ws Tadévipw
dXo1sv Euseb. Pr. 1. 15. Some of the Puranas. as
the Matsya, Vayu. Linga. Bhagavata. and
Markandeya, add a description of a participation of
properties amongst the elements, which is rather
