BOOK IV, 2

313

mraein we faq कालमभिमतोपभोगं gy,

स्वपुरञ्च WTA & vit
"Holy sage, I have witnessed this your
marvellous power; you like miraculous

faculties I have never known any other to
possess. How great is the reward of your
devout austerities! Having thus saluted the
sage and been received by him with respect,
the Raja resided with him for some time,
partaking of the pleasures of the place and
then returned to his capital.

कालेन गच्छता TT राजतनयासु तासु पुत्रशतं
सार्द्धमभवत्। तदनुदिनारूढस्रेहह स tet
ममताकृष्टहृदयोऽभवत्॥४२॥

अप्येतेऽस्मत्पुत्रा: कलभाषिण: पद्भ्यां गच्छेयु:। अत्येते
यौवनिनो भवेयु:, अपि कृतदारानेतान् पश्येयम्, अप्येतेषां
पुत्रा भवेयु:, अथ तत्पुत्रान् पुत्रसमन्नितान् पश्ययम्?
एवमादिमनोरथमनुदिनकालसम्पत्तिवृतिमवेत्यैतत्

सञ्चिन्तयामास।।४३॥
अहो मे मोहस्यातिविस्तार:।

In the course of time the daughters of
Mandhatri bore to Saubhari a hundred and
fifty sons and day by day his affection for his
children became more intense and his heart
was wholly occupied with the sentiment of
self.” "These my sons," he loved to think,
"will charm me with their infant prattle; then
they will learn to walk; they will then grow up
to youth and to manhood : I shall see them
married and they will have children; and I may
behold the children of those children." By
thcse and similar reflections, however, he
perceived that his anticipation's every day
outstripped the course of time and at last he
exclaimed, "What exceeding folly is mine!

`मनोरथानां न समाप्तिरस्ति
वर्षायुतेनापि तथाब्दलक्षै:।
पूर्णेषु पूर्णेषु पुनर्नवानाम्
उत्पत्तय: सन्ति मनोरथानाम्॥४४॥

There is no end to my desires. Though all I
hope should come to pass for ten thousand or a
hundred thousand years, still new wishes
would spring up.

पद्भ्यां गता यौवनिनश्च जाता
दारैश्च संयोगमिता: प्रसूता:।
BE पुनर्वाञ्छति मेऽन्तरात्मा॥४५॥

When I have seen my infants walk; when I
have beheld their youth, their manhood, their
marriage, their progeny; still my expectations
are unsatisfied and my soul yearns to behold
the descendants of their descendants.

द्रक्ष्यामि तेषामपि चेत् प्रसूतिं
मनोरथो मे भविता ततोऽन्य:।

पूर्णेऽपि तत्राप्यपरस्य जन्म
निवार्य्यते केन मनोरथस्य।। ४६॥

Shall I even see them some other wish will
be engendered; and when that is accomplished,
how is the birth of fresh desire to be
prevented?

आ मृत्युतो नैव मनोरथाना-

मन्तोऽस्ति विज्ञातमिदं मया च।
मनोरथासक्तिपरस्य चिन्तं

न जायते वै परमात्मसङ्घि।४७॥

T have at last discovered that there is no end
to hope, until it terminates in death; and that
the mind which is perpetually engrossed by
expectation, can never be attached to the
supreme spirit.

स मे समाधिर्जलवासमित्र-

मत्स्यस्य सङ्गात् सहसैव नष्ट:।
परिग्रहोत्थाश्च महाविधित्सा:॥४८]॥

My mental devotions, while immersed in
water, were interrupted by attachments to my
friend the fish. The result of that connection
was my marriage; and insatiable desires are
the consequences of my married life.
