290

the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances upon
the banks of the Narmada river;’ and
approaching them in the semblance of a naked
mendicant, with his head shaven and carrying
a bunch of a peacock's feathers,’ he thus
addressed them in gentle accents :

मायामोह उवाच

हे दैत्यपतयो। ga यदर्थं तप्यते तप:।
ऐहिकं वाथ पारत्र्यं तपस: फलमिच्छ्था३॥

"Ho, lords of the Daitya race! Wherefore is
it that you practise these acts of penance? Is it
with a view to recompense in this world or in
another?"

पारत्र्यफललाभाय तपश्चर्या महामते!
अस्माभिरियमारब्धा किं वा तेऽत्र विवक्षितम्॥४॥

"Sage," replied the Daityas, "we pursue
these devotions to obtain a rcward hereafter;
why should you make such an inquiry?"
मायामोह उवाच

कुरुध्वं मम वाक्यानि यदि मुक्तिमभीप्सथ।
अर्हध्वमेनं धर्मञ्च मुक्तिद्वारमसंवृतम्।। ५॥
ant विमुक्तेरर्होऽयं नैतदस्मात् पर: UE:
अत्रैव संस्थिता: स्वर्गं विमुक्तिं वा १मिष्यथ।
seed धर्ममेतञ्च सर्वे यूयं महाबल:॥ ६॥

"If you are desirous of final emancipation,"
answered the seeming ascetic, "attend to my
words, for you are worthy of a revelation
which is the door to ultimate felicity. The
duties that I will teach you are the secret path
to liberation ; there are none beyond or
superior to them : by following them you shall
obtain either heaven or exemption from future
existence. You, mighty beings, are deserving
of such lofty doctrine."

षराशर उवाच
एवं प्रकारैर्बहुभिर्युक्तिदर्शनवद्धिते:।
मायामोहेन ते दैत्या वेदमार्गादपाकृता:॥ ७॥
धर्मायैतदधर्माय wera सदित्यपि।
विमुक्तये त्विदं faq विमुक्तिं सम्प्रयच्छति॥८॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

परमार्थोऽयमत्यर्थं परमार्थो न चाप्ययम्।
कार्यमेतदकार्यञ्च नैतदेवं स्फुटं त्विदम्।
दिग्वाससामयं धर्मो धर्मोऽयं बहुवाससाम्।। ९॥
इत्यनैकान्तवादञ्च मायामोहेन नैकधा।

तेन दर्शयता दैत्या: स्वधर्मांस्त्याजिता द्विज।। १०॥
अर्हतेमं महाधर्मं मायामोहेन ते यत:।
प्रोक्तास्तमाश्रिता धर्ममार्हतास्तेन तेऽभवन्॥ ११॥

By such persuasions and by many specious
arguments, did this delusive being mislead the
Daityas from the tenets of the Vedas; teaching
that the same thing might be for the sake of
virtue and of vice; might be and might not be;
might or might not contribute to liberation;
might be the supreme object and not the
supreme object; might be effect and not be
effect; might be manifest or not- be manifest,
might be the duty of those who go naked or
who go clothed in much raiment : and so the
Daityas were seduced from their proper duties
by the repeated lessons of their illusory
preceptor, maintaining the cqual truth of
contradictory tenets;? and they .are called
Arhatas,’ from the phrase he had employed of
"You are worthy (4rhatha) of this great
doctrine;" that is, of the false doctrines which
he persuaded them to embrace.

त्रयीधर्मसमुत्सर्गं मायामोहेन तेऽसुरा:।
कारितास्तन्मया ह्यासंस्ततोऽन्ये तत्प्रबोधिता:।॥ १२॥
तैरप्यन्ये परे तैश्च तैरप्यन्ये परे च तै:।
अल्पैरहोभि: सन्त्यक्ता तैर्दैत्यै: प्रायशस्त्रयी॥ १३॥
पुनश्च रक्ताम्बरधूङ् मायामोहोऽजितेक्षिण:।
अन्यानाहासुरान् गत्वा मृद्बल्पमधुराक्षरम्॥ १४॥

The foes of the gods being, thus induced to
apostatise from the religion of Vedas, by the
delusive person sent by Visnu, became in their
turn teachers of the same heresies and
perverted others; and these, again,
communicating their principles to others, by
whom they were still further disseminated, the
Vedas were in a short time deserted by most of

` the Daitya race. Then the same deluder,
‘putting on garments of a red colour, assuming
