BOOK I, CHAP. 6

179

their eyes downwards, behold the sufferings of
those in hell.’” The various stages of existence,
Maitreya, are inanimate things, fish. birds, ani-
mals, men, holy men, gods, and liberated
spirits; each in succession a thousand degrees
superior to that which precedes it: and through
these stages the beings that are either in
heaven or in hell are destined to proceed, until
final emancipation be obtained.'’ That sinner
goes to Naraka who negtects the due expiation
of his guilt.

पापानामनुरूपाणि प्रायश्चित्तानि Ae यथा।

तथा तथैव संस्मृत्य प्रोक्तानि परमर्षिभि:।। ३३॥

पापे गुरूणि गुरूणि स्वल्पान्यल्पे व तद्दिद:।

प्रायश्चित्तानि मैत्रेय! जगु: स्वायम्भुवादय:॥ ३४॥

प्रायश्चित्तान्यशेषाणि तप:कर्मात्मकानि वै।

यानि तेषामशेषाणां कृष्णानुस्मरणं परम्॥ ३५॥

कृते पापेऽनुतापो वै यस्य पुंस: प्रजायते।

प्रायश्चित्तन्तु तस्यैकं हरिसंस्मरणं परम्।। ३६॥

प्रातर्निशि तथा सन्ध्या-मध्याह्नादिषु संस्मरन्।

नारायणमवाप्नोति सद्म: पापक्षयं नर:॥ ३७॥

विष्णुसंस्मरणात् क्षीणसमस्तक्लेशसञ्जय:।

मुक्तिं प्रयाति स्वर्गाप्तिस्तस्य विघ्नोऽनुमीयते॥ ३ ८॥

वासुदेवे मनो यस्य जपहोमार्च्चनादिषु।

तस्यान्तरायो मैत्रेय! देवेन्द्रत्वादिकं फलम्।। ३९॥

aa नाकपृष्ठगमनं पुनरावृत्तिलक्षणम्।

क्व जपो वासुदेवेति मुक्तिबीजमनुत्तमम्॥४०॥

तस्मादहर्निशं विष्णुं संस्मरम् पुरुषो मुने।

न याति नरकं मर्त्य: संक्षीणाखिलपातक:।॥ ४ १॥

For, Maitreya, suitable acts of expiation
have been enjoined by the great sages for
everykind of crime.'’* Arduous penances for
grcat sins, trifling ones for minor offences,
have been propounded by Svayambhuva and
others: but reliance upon Krsna is far better
than any such expiatory acts, as religious
austerity, or the like. Let any one who repents
of the sin of which he may have been culpable

have recourse to this best of all expiations,
remembrance of Hari:'* by admidday, a man

shall be quickly cleaned from all guilt: the
while heap of worldly sorrows is dispersed by
meditating on Hari; and his worshipper,
looking upon heavenly fruition as an
impediment to felicity, obtains final
emancipation. He whose mind is devoted to
Hari in silent prayer, burnt-offering, or
adoration, is impatient even of the glory of the
king of th gods. Of what avail is ascent to the
summit of heaven, if it is necessary to return
from thence to earth? How different is the
meditation on Vasudeva, which is the seed of
eternal freedom! Hence, Muni, the man who
thinks of Visnn, day and night, goes not to
Naraka after death, for all his sins are atoned
for.

मन:प्रीतिकर: स्वर्गो नरकस्तद्विपर्यय:।
नरक-स्वर्गसंज्ञे वै पापपुण्ये द्विजोत्तम।।४२॥
वस्त्वेकमेव दु:खाय सुखायेष्यद्भिवाय च।

कोपाय च यतस्तस्मादू वस्तु वस्त्वात्मकं कुत:॥४३॥
तदेव प्रीतये भूत्वा पुनर्दु:खाय जायते।

तदेव कोपाय तत: प्रसादाय च AA ¥ vl
तस्माद् दु:खात्मकं नास्ति न च किञ्चित् सुखात्मकम्।
मनस: परिणामोऽयं सुखदु:खादिलक्षण:॥ ४५॥
ज्ञानमेव परं Tal ज्ञानं बन्धाय चेष्यते।
ज्ञानात्मकमिदं fast न ज्ञानाद् विद्यते परम्।
विद्याविद्येति मैत्रेय! ज्ञानमेवावधारय॥४६॥

Heaven (or Svarga) is that which delights
the mind; hel (or Naraka) is that which gives it
pain: hence vice is called hell; virtue is called
heaven.'* The selfsame thing is applicable to
the production of pleasue or pain, of malice or
of anger. Whence then can it be considered as
essentialy the same with either? That which at
one time is a source of enjoyment, becomes at
another the cause of suffering; and the same
thing may at diferent seasons excite wrath, or
conciliate favour. It follows, then, that nothing
is in itself either pleasurable or painful; and
pleasure and pain, and the like, are merely
definitions of various statcs of mind. That
which alone is truth is wisdom; but wisdom
