14

THE VISNU-PURANAM

PONV oversees PPOVTIOV KOOLOV aNavTa
......... Kata coovoa 0०79
vias in a more familiar passage:
Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per artus
Mens agitat molem et magno se corpore miscet:

or perhaps it more closely approximates to the
Phoenician cosmogony. io which a spirit mixing
with its own principles gives rise to creation.
Brucker, I. 240, As presently explained, the mixture
is not mechanical; it is an influence or effect
exerted upon intermediate agents, which produce
effect,; as perfumes do not delight the mind by
actual contact, but by the impression they make
upon the sense of smelling, which communicates it
to the mind. The entrance of the supreme Visnu
into spirit as well as matter is less intelligible than
the view elsewhere taken of it, as the infusion of
spirit, identified with the Supreme, into Prakrti or
matter alone. Thus in the Pradma Purana:

योऽसौ प्रकृत्या: पुरुष: प्रोच्यते स इहाच्युत:।
स एव भगवान्विष्णु प्रकृत्यामाविवेशह॥

‘He who is called the male (spirit) of Prakrti, is
here named Acyuta; and that same divine Visnu
entered into Prakrti.' So the Brhat Ndaradiya: wEat
क्षोभमापन्रे पुरुषाख्ये जगद्गुरौ। The lord of the world, who
is called Purusa, producing agitation in Prakrti.'
From the notion of influence or agitation produced
on matter through or with spirit, the abuse of
personification led to actual or vicarious admixture.
Thus the Bhagavata, identifying Maya with Prakrti,
has,

कालवृत्त्या तु मायायां गुणमध्यामधोक्षज:।

पुरुषेणात्मभूतेन वीर्य्यमाधत्त वीर्य्यवान्॥

Through the operation of time. the Mighty One,
who is present to the pure. implanted a seed in
Maya endowcd with qualities, as Purusa, which is
one with himself’ B. III. s. 5. And the Bhavisya:
‘Some learned men say that the Supreme Being,
desirous to create beings, creates in the
commencement of the Kalpa a body of soul (or an
incorporcal substance): which soul created by him
enters into Prakrti: and Prakrti being thereby
agitated, creates many material elements:' अन्ये चेदं
महाबाही प्रवदन्ति मनीषिण:।। योऽसावात्मा परस्तात् कल्पादौ सृजते
तनुं। पुद्गलस्य महावाहो सिसृक्षुर्विवधा: प्रजा:॥ तेन सृष्ट: पुंद्लस्तु
प्रधानं विशते zai wert क्षोभितं तेन gard विकारान् बहून्॥

But these may be regarded as notions of a later
date. In the Mahabharata the first cause is declared
to be ‘Intellectual, who creates by his mind or will:
मानसो नाम पूर्वाऽपि faga बै. महर्षिभि:। अनादिनिधनो
देवस्तथाभेद्योऽजरामर:॥ 'The first (Being) is called
Manasa (intellectual). and is so celebrated by great
sages: he is God, without beginning or end.
indivisible, immortal, undecaying.’ And again:
प्रजाविसर्गं विविधं मानसो मनसोऽसृजत्। The Intellectual
created many kinds of creatures by his mind.‘

20. Contraction, Sankoca (संकोच:), is explained
by Simya (411), sameness or equilibrium of the
three qualities, or inert Pradhana: and Expansion,
Vikasa (बिकाश:), is the destruction of — this
equipoise, by previous agitation and consequent
development of material products.

21. The term here is Ksetrajfia. ‘embodied spirit’
or that which knows the Ksétra or 'body” implying
the combination of spirit with form or matter, for
the purpose of creating.

22. The first product of Pradhana sensible to
divine, though not to mere human organs, is, both
according to the Sarnkhya and Pauranic doctrines,
the principle called Mahat, literally ‘the Grcat.'
explained in other places, as in our text. "the
production of the manifestation of the qualities:'
गुणव्यंजनसम्भूति:। or, as in the Vayu, गुण
महान् प्रादुर्बभूव ह। We have in the same Purana, as well
as in the Brahmanda and Linga, a number of
synonyms for this term. as, FAI महान् मतिर्ब्रह्मा पूर्बुद्धि:
ख्यातिरीश्वर:। प्रज्ञा fafa: स्मृति: संबिद्विपुरं चोच्यते बुधै:। They
are also explained, though not very distinctly, to the
folowing purport: Manas is that which considers
the consequences of acts to all creatures, and
provides for their happiness. Mahat, the Great
principle, is so termed from being the first of the
created principles, and from its extension being
greater than that of the rest. Mati is that which
discriminates and distinguishes objects preparatory
to their fruition by Soul. Brahma implies that which
effeets the development and augmentation of
created things. Pur is that by which the coneurrence
of nature occupies and fills all bodies. Buddhi is
that which communicates to soul the knowledge of
good and evil. Khyati is the means of individual
fruition. or the faculty of discriminating objects by
appropriate designations, and the like. Isvara is that
which knows all things as if they were present.
Prajfia is that by which the properties of things arc
