492

THE VISNU-PURANAM

related to the hero the deeds of the demon
Naraka. “By you, Madhustidana, lord of the
gods,” said Indra, “in a mortal condition, all
sufferings have been soothed. Arista.
Dhenuka, Chandra, Mustika, Kesin, who
sought to injure helpless man, have all been
slain by you, Karisa, Kuvalayapida, the child-
destroying Putand, have becn killed by you;
and so have other oppressors to the world. By
you valour and wisdom the three worlds have
been preserved, and the gods, obtaining their
share of the sacrifices offered by the devout,
enjoy satisfaction. But now hear the occasion
on which । have come to you, and which you
are able to remedy. The son of the earth,’
called Naraka, who rules over the city of
Pragjyotisa,’ inflicts a great injury upon all
creatures. Carrying off the maidens of gods,
saints, demons, and kings, he shuts them up in
his own palace. He has taken away the
umbrella of Varuna, impermeable to water, the
jewel mountain crest of Mandara, and the
celestial nectar-dropping earings of my mother
Aditi; and he now demands my elephant
Airavata. I have thus explained to you,
Govinda, the tyranny of the Asura; you can
best determinc now it is to be prevented."

पराशर उवाच

इति श्रुत्वा स्मितं कृत्वा भगवान् देवकीसुत्त:।
गृहीत्वा वासवं SA समुत्तस्थौ वरासनात्।॥ १३॥
चिन्तयामास च विभुर्मनसा पन्नगाशनम्।
सञ्चिन्तितमुपारुह्य Tes WHAT

सत्यभामां समारोप्य at प्राग्ज्योतिषं पुरम्।। १४॥
आरुह्यैरावतं नागं शक्रोऽपि त्रिदिवालयम्।

Having heard this account, the divine Hari
gently smiled, and, rising from his throne, took
Indra by the hand: then wishing for the eater
of the serpents, Garuda immediately appeared;
upon whom his master, having first seated
Satyabh4ma upon his back, ascended, and flew
to Pragjyotisa. Indra mounted his elephant,
and, in the sight of the inhabitants of Dvaraka,
went to the abode of the gods.

ततो जगाम् मैत्रेय! पश्यतां द्वारकौकसाम्।। १५॥
प्राग्ज्योतिषपुरस्यासीत् समन्ताच्छतयोजनम्।
आचिंता मौरवे: पाशै: क्षुरान्तैभूर्दविजोत्तम।। १६॥
तांश्चिच्छेद eft: पाशान् क्षिप्त्वा ah सुदर्शनम्।
ततो मुरु: समुन्तस्थौ तं जघान च केशव: ett
मुंरोश्च तनयान् सप्त सहस्रांस्तांस्ततो हरि:।
चक्रधारग्निनिर्दग्धांश्चकार शलभानिव ॥१८॥
प्राग्ज्योतिषसुरं धीमास्त्वरावान् समुपागत:।। १९॥
भरकेणास्य तत्राभून्महासैन्येन संयुग:।

कृष्णस्य यत्र गोविन्दो जघ्ने दैत्यान् AKA: ott
शस्त्रास्त्रवर्ष मुञ्चन्तं भौमं तं नरकं बली।

क्षिप्त्वा चक्रं feat चक्रे चक्री देतेयचक्रहा।। २१॥
हते तु नरके भूमिर्गृहीत्वा दितिकण्डले।

उपतस्थे जगन्नाथं वाक्यं चेदमथाब्रवीत्।। २२॥

The environs of Pragjyotisa were defended
by nooses, constructed by the demon Muru,
the edges of which were as sharp as razors; but
Hari, throwing his discus Sudargana amongst
them, cut them to pieces. Then Muru started
up, but KeSava slew him, and burnt his seven
thousand sons, like moths, with the flame of
the edge of his discus. Having slain Muru,
Hayagriva. and Pafichajana, the wise Hari
rapidly reached the city of Pragjyotisa: tnere a
fierce conflict took place with the troops of
Naraka in which Govinda destroyed thousands
of demons; and when Naraka came into the
field, showering upon the deity all sorts of
weapons, the wielder of the discus, and
annihilator. of the demon tribe, cut him in two
with his celestial missile. Naraka being slain.
Earth, bearing the two earrings of Aditi,
approached the lord of the world, and said,

पृथिव्युवाच
यदाहमुद्धता AT! त्वया शूकरमूर्तिना।
त्वत्स्पर्शसम्भव: पुत्रस्तदायं मय्यजायत।। २३॥
सोऽयं त्वयैव दत्तो मे त्वयैव विनिपातित:।
गृहाण कुण्डले चेमे पालयास्य च सन्ततिम्।। २४॥
