BOOK III, CHAP. 11

263

wholesome, boiled with clean water, procured
from no vile person nor by improper means,
nor improperly cooked.

दत्त्वा तु भुक्तं शिष्येभ्य: क्षुधितेभ्यस्तथा गृही।
प्रशस्तशुद्धपात्रेषु भुञ्जीताकुपितो नृप॥ ७९॥
नासन्दीसंस्थिते पात्रे नादेशे च नरेश्वर!

नाकाले नातिसङ्कीर्णे SAT नरोऽग्नये।। ८०॥
`भन्त्राभिमन्नितं शस्तं न च पर्युषितं za!

STAT फलमांसेभ्य: शुष्कशाकादिकात्तथा।॥ ८१
तद्वद्धरीतकेभ्यश्च गुडपक्वेभ्य एव च।

भुञ्जीतोद्भूतसाराणि न कदापि नरेश्वर॥ ८ २॥
नाशेषं पुरुषोऽश्नीयादन्यत्र जगतीपते।!
मध्वम्बुदधिसर्पिभ्य: सक्तुभ्यश्च विवेकवान्।। ८३॥

Having given a portion to his hungry
companions, let him take his foot without
reproach out of a clean handsome vessel,
which must not be placed upon a low stool or
bed. He must not eat in an unfit place or out
of season, nor in an incommodious attitude;
nor must he first cast any of his meal into the
fire. Let his food be made only with suitable
texts; let it be good of its kind; and it must not
be stale, except in the case of fruit or meat;!®
nor must it be of dry vegetable substances,
other than jujubes'’ or preparations of
molasses; but never must a man eat of that of
which the juices have been extracted.'* Nor
must a man eat so as to leave no residue of his
meal, except in the case of flour, cakes, honey,
water, curds and butter.

STRAT भूत्वा पूर्वन्तु मधुरं रसम्।

लवणाम्लौ तथा मध्ये कटुतिक्तादिकं तत:॥ ८४॥

wy पुरुषोऽश्नीयान्मध्ये कठिनभोजन:।

अन्ते पुनर्द्रवाशी तु बलारोग्ये न YSN ८५॥

अनिन्द्यं भक्षयेदित्यं वाग्यतोऽन्नमकुत्सयन्।

US ग्रासान् महामौनं प्राणाद्याप्यायनाय च।। ८६॥

Let him, with an attentive mind, first taste

that which has a sweet flavour; he may take
salt and sour things in the middle course and

finish with those which are pungent and bitter.
The man who commences his meal with

fluids, then partakes of solid food and finishes
with fluids again, will ever be strong and
healthy. In this manner let him feed without
fault, silent and contented with his food;
taking, without uttering a word, to the extent
of five handfuls, for the nutriment of the vital
principle.

YRA सम्यगथाचम्य प्राङ्मुखोदड्मुखोऽपि वा।

यथावत् पुनराचामेत् पाणी प्रक्षाल्य मूलत:।॥ ८७॥

स्वस्थ: प्रशान्तचित्तस्तु कृतासनपरिग्रह:।

अभीष्टदेवतानान्तु Halt स्मरणं नर:॥ ८ ८॥

अग्निराप्याययत्वन्नं पार्थिवं पवनेरित:।

दत्तावकाशं नभसा जरयत्वस्तु मे सुखम्॥ ८९॥

अन्नं बलाय मे भूमेरपामग्न्यनिलस्य च।

भवत्वेत्परिणतौ ममास्त्वव्याहतं FAI ९०॥

प्राणापानसमानानामुदानव्यानयोस्तथा।

अन्नं पुष्टिकरञ्चास्तु ममाप्यव्याहतं FSA ९ १॥

Having eaten sufficiently, the householder
is then to rinse his mouth, with his face turned
towards the east or the north; and having again
sipped water, he is to wash his hands from the
wrist downwards. With a pleased and tranquil
spirit he is then to take a seat and call to
memory his tutelary deity; and then he is thus
to pray : "May fire, excited by air, convert this
food into the earthly elements of this frame
and in the space afforded by the ethereal
atmosphere cause it to digest and yield me
satisfaction! May this food, in its assimilation,
contribute to the vigour of the earth, water, fire
and air of my body and afford unmixed
gratification!

अगस्तिरग्निर्बडवानलश्च
भुक्तं मयान्नं जरयत्वशेषम्।
सुखञ्च मे तत्परिणामसम्भवं
यच्छत्वरोगो मम चास्तु देहे॥९२॥
प्रधानभूतो भगवान् यथैक:।
सत्येन तेनान्नमशेषमेत-
दारोग्यदं मे परिणाममेतु।। ९३॥
