३68 THE VISNU-PURANAM

12. A rather violent anachronism to make
Janaka contemporary with Balarama.

13. The text gives the commencement of the
prayer, but commentator does not say whence it is

taken ; सवनगतौ क्षत्रियवैश्यौ निघ्नन् geet भगवति। ‘Oh,

goddess! The murderer of a Ksatriya or Vaisya,
engaged in religious duties, is the slayer of a
Braéhmana;' i.e. the crime is equally heinous,
Perhaps the last word should be भवति ‘is’.

14. Some of the circumstances of this
marvellous gem seem to identify it with a stone of
widely diffused celebrity in the East and which,
according to the Mohamedan writers, was given
originally by Noah to Japhet; the Hijer al mattyr of
the Arabs, Sang yeddat of the Persians and Jeddah
tash of the Turks, the possession of which secures
rain and fertility. The author of the Habib-us-Sier
gravely asserts that this stone was in the hands of
the Mongols in his day or in the tenth century.

15. Krsna's_ reflecting, the commentator
observes, is to be understood of him only as
consistent with the account here given of him, as if
he were a mere man; for, as he was omniscient,
there was no occasion for him to reflect or reason.
Krsna however appears in this story in a very
different light from that in which he is usually
represented; and the adventure, it may be remarked,
is detached from the place in which we might have
expected to find it, the narrative of his life, whch
forms the subject of the next book.

16. The story of the Syamantaka gem occurs in
the Bhagavata. Vayu, Matsya, Brahma and Hari
Varnsa and is alluded to in other Puranas. It may be
considered as one common to the whole series.
Independently of the part borne in it by Krsna, it
presents a curious and no doubt a faithful picture of
ancient manners, in the loose self-government of a
kindred clan, in the acts of personal violence which
are committed, in the feuds which ensue, in the
public meetings which are held and the part that is
taken by the elders and by the wo.uen in all the
proceedings of the community.

kK
