THE VISNU-PURANAM

BOOK V
CHAPTER I अथान्तरीक्षे वागुच्चै: कंसमाभाष्य सादरम्।
प्रथम: अध्याय: मेघगम्भीरनिर्घोषिं समाभाष्येदमब्रवीत्।। ७॥

भैत्रेय उवाच
नृपाणां कथित: wal भवता वंशविस्तर:।
वंशानुचरितञ्चैव यथावदनुवर्णितम्।। en
अंशावतारो Ta योऽयं यदुकुलोद्भव:।
विष्णोस्तं विस्तरेणाहं श्रोतुमिच्छाम्यशेषत:।॥ २॥
wart यानि कर्माणि भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम:।
अंशाशेनावतीर्य्यरव्या ax तानि मुने! वद।।३॥

Maitreya said'-You have related to me a
full account of all the different dynasties of
kings and of their successive transactions. I
wish now to hear a more particular
description, holy Rsi, of the portion of Visnu”
that came down upon earth and was born in
the family of Yadu. Tell me also what actions
he performed in his descent, as a part of a part
of the supreme, upon the earth.’

WIP उवाच
Aaa! श्रूयतामेतद् यत् पृष्टोऽहमिदं त्वया।
विष्णोरंशांश-सम्भूति-चरितं जगतो fers
Parasgara said— I will relate to you,
Maitreya, the account which you have
requested; the birth of a pare of a pare of Vis

nu and the benefits which his actions
conferred upon the world.

देवकास्य Gat पूर्वं वसुदेवो महामुने।
उपयेमे महाभागां देवकीं देवतोपमाम्॥ ५॥
कंसस्तयोर्वररथं चोदयामास सारथि:।
वसुदेवस्य देवक्या: संयोगे भोजवर्द्धन:॥ ६॥

यामेतां aga ye! सह wat रथे स्थिताम्।
अस्यास्ते चाष्टमो गर्भ: प्राणानपहरिष्यति॥ ८॥।

Vasudeva formerly married the daughter of
Devaka, the illustrious Devaki, a maiden of
celestial beauty. After their nuptials, Karhsa,
the increaser of the race of Bhoja, drove their
car as their charioteer. As they were going
along, a voice in the sky, sounding aloud and
deep as thunder, addressed Karhsa and said,
‘*Fool that you are, the eighth child of the
damsel whom you are driving in the car shall
take away your life*!’’ On hearing this, Karnsa
drew his sword and was about to put Devaki to
death; but Vasudeva interposed, saying, ‘‘Kill
not Devaki, great warrior; spare her life and I
will deliver to you every child that she may
bring forth.’’ Appeased by which promise and
relying on the character of Vasudeva, Karhsa
desisted from the attempt.

पराशर उवाच
देवकीं हन्तुमारब्धो वसुदेवोऽब्रवीदिदम्।। ९॥
न हन्तव्या महाबाहो। देवकी भवता तव।
समर्पयिष्ये सकलान् गर्भानस्योदरोद्भवान्॥ १०॥
तथेत्याह च तं कंसो वसुदेवं द्विजोत्तम।
न घातयामास च at देवकीं तस्य गौरवात्।। ११॥
एतस्मिन्नेव काले तु भूरिभारावपीडिता।
जगाम धरणी At समाजे त्रिदिवौकसाम्।। १२॥
सब्रह्मकान् सुरान् सर्वान् प्रणित्याह मेदिनी।
कथयामास तत्सर्वं खेदात् करुणभाषिणी।। १३॥

At that time, Earth, overburdened by her
load, repaired to mount Meru to an assembly
