BOOK V, CHAP. 6

427

प्रच्छन्न एव गोपानां संस्कारानकरोत् तयो:।॥ ८॥
Wes राममित्याह कृष्णञ्चैव तथापरम्।

गर्गो मतिमतां श्रेष्ठो नाम कुर्वन् महामति:।। ९॥
स्वल्पेनैव fe कालेन रिङ्गिणौ at तदा व्रजे।
घृष्टजानुकरौ at fe बभूवतुरुभावपि॥ १०॥
करीषभस्मदिग्धाङ्गौ भ्रममाणवितस्तत:।

न निवारयितुं शेके यशोदा न च रोहिणी।। ११॥
गोवाटमध्ये क्रीडन्तो वत्सवाटगतौ पुन:।
तदहर्जातगीवत्सपुच्छाकर्षणतत्परौ॥ १२॥

The initiatory rites requisite for the two
boys were performed by Garga, who was sent
to Gokula by Vasudeva for that purpose : he
celebrated them without the knowledge of the
cowherds;'! and the wise sage, eminent
amongst the wise, named the elder of them
Rama and the other Krsna. In a short time they
began to crawl about the ground, supporting
themselves on their hands and knees and
creeping everywhere, often amidst ashes and
filth. Neither Rohini not Yasoda was able to
prevent them from getting into the cowpens or
amongst the calves, where they amused
themselves by pulling their tails.

यदा यशोदा तौ बालावेकस्थानचरावुभौ।
शशाक नो वारयितुं क्रीडन्तावतिचञ्चलौ।। १३॥
यशोदा यष्टिमादाय कोपेनानुगता च तम्।
HOT कमलपत्राक्षं TAA VAT तदा।। १४॥
दाम्ना Tea तदा HEY निबध्याथ उदूखले।
कृष्णमक्किष्टकर्माणमाह चेदममर्षिता।। १५॥

As they disregarded the prohibitions of
Yasoda and rambled about together constantly,
she became angry and taking up a stick,
followed them and threatened the dark-
complexioned Krsna with a _ whipping.
Fastening a cord round his waist, she tied him
to the wooden mortar,’ and being in a great
passion, she said to him,

यदि शक्नोषि गच्छ त्वमतिचञ्चलचेष्टित।
इत्युक्त्वा च निजं कर्म सा चकार कुटम्बिनी।। ge

व्याग्रायामथ तस्यां स कर्षमाण उदूखलम्।
यमलार्जुनमध्येन जगाम कमलेक्षण:॥ १७॥
कर्षता वृक्षयोर्मध्ये तिर्यगागतमुदूखलम्।
भग्नावुत्तूङ्गशाखाग्रो तेन at यमलार्जजुनौ।। १८॥

“‘Now, you naughty boy, get away from
hence if you can,’’ She then went about her
domestic affairs. As soon as she had departed,
the lotus-eycd Krsna, endeavouring to
extricate himself, pulled the mortar after him
to the space between two Arjuna trees that
grew near together : having dragged the
mortar between these trees, it became wedged
aviary there and as Krsna pulled it through, it
pulled down the trunks of the trees.

तत्त: कटकाशब्दं समाकर्ण्य च BAT!
आजगाम व्रजजनो ददृशे च AEA १९॥
भग्नस्कन्धौ निपतितौ भग्नशाखौ महीतले।

नवोद्गताल्पदन्तांशु-सितहासञ्च बालकम्।। २०॥
TAT दामोदरतां स ययो दामबन्धनात्।। २ १1
गोपवृद्धास्तत: We नन्दगोपपुरोगमा:।
मन्त्रयामासुरुद्विग्ना महोत्पातातिभीरव:।। २ २॥

Hearing the crackling noise, the people of
Vraja came to see what was the matter and
there they beheld the two large trees, with
shattered stems and broken branches, prostrate
on the ground, with the child fixed between
them, with a rope round his belly, laughing
and showing his white little teeth, just budded.
It is hence that Krsna is called Damodara,
from the binding of the rope (dama) round his
belly (udara).> The elders of the cowherds,
with Nanda at their head, looked upon these
circumstances with alarm, considering them as
of evil omen.

स्थानेनेह न न: कार्य गच्छामोऽन्यन्महावनम्।
उत्पाता GSA ह्यत्र दृश्यन्ते नाशहेतव:॥ २३॥
पूतनाया विनाशश्च शकटस्य विपर्यय:।

विना वातादि-दोषेण Frat: पतनं तथा।। २४॥
वृन्दावनमित: स्थानात् तस्माद् गच्छाम मा चिरम्।
