186

THE VISNU-PURANAM

ह्रस्वोऽक्षस्तद्ययुगार्द्धन TANT WT वै।
द्वितीयेऽक्षे तु तच्चक्रं संस्थितं मानसाचले।। ६॥
हयाश्च सप्त च्छन्दांसि तेषां नामानि मे शृणु।
गायत्री स बृहत्युष्णिग् जगती त्रिष्टुबेव च।
अनुष्टुप् पंक्तिरित्युक्ताश्छन्दांसि हरयो रवे:॥७॥

The chariot of the sun is nine thousand
leagues in length, and the pole is of twice that
longitude; ! the axle is fifteen millions and
seven hundred thousand leagues long;? on
which is fixed a wheel with three naves, five
spokes, and six peripheries, consisting of the
ever-during year; the whole constituting the
circle or wheel of time.’ The chariot has
another axle, which is forty-five hundred
leagues long.* The two halves of the yoke are
of the same length respectively as the two
axles (the longer and the shorter). The short
axle, with the short yoke, is supported by the
pole-star: the end of longer axle, to which the
wheel of the car is attached, moves on the
M§anasa mountain.’ The seven horses of the
sun’s car are the metres of the Vedas, Gayatri,
Brhati, Usnih, Jagati, Tristubh, Anustubh, and
Pankti.

भानोत्तरशैले तु पूर्वतो वासवी पुरी।

दक्षिणेन यमस्यान्या प्रतीच्यां वरुणस्य च।
उत्तरेण च सोमस्य तासां नामानि मे शृणु॥ ८॥
वस्वौकसारा शक्रस्य याम्या संयमनी तथा।

पुरी मुख्या जलेशस्य सोमस्य च विभावरी।। ९॥

The city of Indra is situated on the eastern
side of the Manasottara mountain; that of
Yama on the southern face; that of Varuna on
the west; and that of Soma on the north;
named severally Vasvokasaré, Sarnyamani,
Mukhya (or Sukha) and Vibhavari.°

मैत्रेय! भगवान् wrqTaifaal चक्रसंयुत:।। १०॥
अहोरात्रव्यवस्थानकारणं भगवान् रवि:।
देवयान: UL: पन्था योगिनां क्लेशसंक्षये॥ ११॥
दिवसस्य रविर्मध्ये सर्वकालं व्यवस्थित:।
सर्वद्वीपेषु मैत्रेय! निशार्द्धस्य च सम्मुख:।। १२॥

सर्वद्वीपेषु da सर्वकालन्तु सम्मुखे।

विदिशासु त्वशेषासु था wert! दिशासु an १३॥
ada दृश्यते भास्वान् स तेषामुदयं: स्मृत:।
तिरोभावञ्च waft तत्रैवास्तमनं रवे:।। १४॥

The glorious sun, Maitreya, darts like an
arrow on his southern course, attended by the
constellations of the Zodiac. He causes the
difference between day and night, and is the
divine vehicle and path of the sages who have
overcome the inflictions of the world. Whilst
the sun, who is the discriminator of all hours,
shines in one continent in midday, in the
opposite Dvipas, Maitreya, it will be midnight:
rising and setting are at all seasons, and are
always (relatively) opposed in the different
cardinal and intermediate points of the
horizon. When the sun becomes visible to any
people, to them he is said to rise; when he
disappears from their view, that is called his
setting. There is in truth neither rising nor
setting of the sun, for he is always, and these
terms merely imply his presence and his
disappearance.

उदयास्तमनाख्यं fe दर्शनादर्शनं रवे:।। १५॥

शक्रादीनां पुरे तिष्ठन् स्पृशत्येष पुरत्रयम्।

विकणौ द्वौ विकर्णस्थस्त्रीन् arog पुरे तथा॥१६॥

उदितो वर्द्धमानाभिरा मध्याह्नात् तपन् रवि:।

Ta: परं ह्रसन्तीभिर्गोभिरस्तं नियच्छति।। eon

उदयास्तमनाभ्याञ्च स्मृते पूर्वापरे दिशौ।

यावत् YR तपति तावत् पृष्ठे च पार्श्वयो:।। १८॥

ऋतेऽमरगिरेर्मेरोरुपरि ब्रह्मण: सभाम्।

ये ये मरीचयोऽर्कस्य प्रयान्ति ब्रह्मण: सभाम्।

ते ये निरस्तास्तद्भासा प्रतीपमुपयान्ति du १९॥

तस्माद्दिश्युत्तरस्यां वै दिवारात्रि: सदैव far

सर्वेषां द्वीपवर्षाणां मेरुरुत्तरतो यत:।। २०॥

When the sun (at midday) passes over

either of the cities of the gods, on Manasottara
mountain (at the cardinal points), his light

extends to three cities and two intermediate
points: when situated in an intermediate point,
