498

THE VISNU-PURANAM

The devourer of serpents, Garuda, laid hold
of the noose of the sovereign of the waters,
and tore it to fragments with his beak, as if it
had been a little snake. The son of Devaki
threw his mace at the club of Yama, and cast it
broken upon the ground: he cut in bits. the
litter of the lord of wealth with his discus: a
glance of his eye eclipsed the radiance of the
sun: be sevcred Agni into a hundred parts with
his arrows, and scattered the Vasus through
the realms of space: with his discus he cut off
the points of the tridents of the Rudras, and
cast themselves upon the earth: and with the
shafts shot from his bow he dispersed the
Sédhyas, Visvas, Maruts, and Gandharbas, like
fleeces of cotton from the pods of the Simul
tree, through the sky, Garuda also diligently
plied his beak and wings and nails, and bit and
bruised and scratched the deities who opposed
his lord.

तत: शरसहस्रेण देवेन्द्र-मधुसूदनौ।

परस्परं ववरषति धाराभिरिव तोयदौ।। ६.४॥
ऐरावतेन Weel युयुधे तत्र संयुगे।

Sa: समस्तैर्युयुधे शक्रेण च जनार्द्दन:।। ६५॥
छिन्नेष्वशेषबाणेषु शस्त्रेष्वस्त्रेषु च त्वरन्।

जग्राह ATA वज्रं कृष्णाश्चक्रं सुदर्शनम्।। ६६॥
ततो हाहाकृतं wa त्रैलोक्यं द्विजसत्तम।
वज्र-चक्रधरौ FEAT देवराज-जनार्द्दनौ।। ६७॥
fat वज्रमथेन्द्रेण जग्राह भगवान् हरि:।

न मुमोच तदा चक्रं तिष्ठ fasta चाब्रवीत्।। ६ ८॥

Then the king of the gods and the foe of
Madhu encountercd and overwhelmcd each
other with countless shafts, like rain-drops
falling from two heavy clouds, Garuda in the
conflict engaged with Ajiravata, and
Janarddana was opposed to all the deities.
When all the other weapons had been cut to
pieces, Indra stood armed with his thunderbolt,
and Krsna with discus Sudarsana. Beholding
them thus prepared for fight, all the people of
the three spheres exclaimed, “Alas ! alas |"

Indra launched his bolt, but in vain, for Hari
caught and arrested it: he, forbore, however, to

hurl his discus, and only called out to Indra to
stay.

प्रनष्टवज्रं देवेन्द्र गरुडक्षतवाहनम्।
सत्यभामाव्रवीद् ALC पलायनपरायणम्।।६९॥
त्रैलोक्येश? न ते युक्तं rity पलायनम्।
पारिजातास्रगाभोगा त्वामुपस्थास्यते शची॥७०॥
कीदृशं देवराज्यन्ते पारिजातस्रगुज्जवलाम्।
अपश्यतो यथापूर्वं प्रणयादागतां शचीम्॥७१॥
अलं शक्र! प्रयातेन न let गन्तुमर्हसि।

नीयतां पारिजातोऽयं देवा: सन्तु गतव्यथा:॥७२॥
यतिगर्वावलेषेन बहुमानपुर:सरम्।

न ददर्श गृहे MATTEO मां शची॥७३॥

Satyabhama seeing Indra disarmed, and his
elephant disabled by Garuda, and the deity
himself about to retreat, said to him, “King of
the triple sphere, it ill becomes the husband of
Sachi to run away, Ornamented with Parijata
garlands, she will approach you. Of what use
is the sovereignty of heaven, embellished with
the Parijata tree, no longer beholding Saci
meet you with offection as of yore ? Nay,
Sakra, fly not; you must not suffer shame:
here, take the Parijata tree; let the gods be no
longer annoyed. Sachi, inflated with pride of
her husband, has not welcomed me to her
dwelling with respectful presents.

eiraraererns खभर्त्तश्लाघनापरा।

ad: कृतवती शक्र भवता सह विग्रहम्॥७४॥
तदलं पारिजातेन परस्वेन हतेन Ts

BUT गर्विता सा तु wat GA का न गर्विता।।७५॥

As a woman, I am light of purpose, and am
anxious for my husband's fame; therefore have
I instigated, Sakra, this contest with you. But I
do not want the Parijata tree, nor do I wish to
take that which is another's property. Sachi is
proud of her beauty. What woman is not proud
of her husband ?”

इत्युक्तो विनिव्रत्तोऽसौ देवराजस्तथा द्विज।
we चैनामलं चण्डि! सख्यु: खेदातिविस्तरै:।७६॥
