BOOK IV, 20

387

son by Draupadi. The son of Yudhisthira was
Prativindhya; of Bhima, Srutasoma; of
Arjuna, Srutakirtti; of Nakula, Satanika; and of
Sahadeva, Srutakarman. The Pandavas had
also other sons.” By his wife Yaudheyi,
Yudhisthira had Devaka. The son of Bhima by
Hidimbaé was Ghatotkaca and he had also
Sarvatraga by his wife Kasi. The son of
Sahadeva by Vijaya was Suhotra; and
Niramitra was the son of Nakula by
Karenumati. Arjuna had Iravat by the serpent-
nymph Ulupi; Babhruvahana, who was
adopted as the son of his maternal grandfather,
by the daughter of the king of Manipura; and
by his wife Subhadra, Abhimanyu, who even
in extreme youth was renowned for his valour
and his strength and crushed the chariots of his
foes in fight. The son of Abhimanyu by his
wife Uttara was Pariksit, who, after the Kurus
were all destroyed, was killed in his mother's
womb by the magic Brahma weapon, hurled
by ASvatthiman ; he was however restored to
life by the clemency of that being whose feet
receive the homage of all the demons and the
gods and who for his own pleasure had
assumed a human’shape (Krsna). This prince,
Pariksit, now reigns over the whole world with
undivided sway.°

NOTES

1, This, although it occurs in other authorities,
appears to be an error, for these are the sons of a
subsequent Pariksit (see the next chapter). The
Matsya omits Pariksit here and the Bhagavata states
that he had no children. In most of the Puranas,
however, the line of Pariksat is continued, but there
is very great confusion in the lineage. According to
the Vayu, Janamejaya was the son of Pariksit,
whose son was Srutasena, whose son was
Bhimasena, Janamejaya had also a son named
Suratha; but Suratha was also the name of the son
of Jahnu, from whom the line continues as in the
text. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa also
make Suratha the son both of Janamejaya and of
Jahnu; and they observe that there are two Riksas,
two Pariksits, three Bhimsenas and _ two

Janamejayas, in the lunar race. Some of the
confusion probably originates with the
Mahabharata, which, as before noticed, gives two
lists from Puru to Santanu, differing from one
another and from all the lists of the Puranas. In the
first of these lists such collateral names have been
retained as appear to have furnished our text and
that of other Puranas with distinct persons : thus
making the members of one fraternity so many
descents. Of the two lists, however, the second is
probably to be regarded as the more recent, if not
more correct; for Vaig&4mpayana repeats it at
Janamejaya's request, because the latter is not
satisfied with the summary account which the
former had first communicated to him.
Mahabharata vol. I. p. 136 and p. 138.

2. The Mahabharata merely states that Devapi
retired to a religious life. The story of his heresy is
narrated, much as in the text, in the Bhagavata,
Vayu. The Matsya adds, that he was also leprous;
on which account his subjects contemned him. He
was probably set aside in favour of his younger
brother, either on that account or on that of his
heresy; such a disposition being conformable to
Hindu law. According to the Bhagavata and Matsya
he is still alive at a place called Kalapa grama,
where, in the Krta age of the next Mahdyuga, he
will be the restorer of the Ksatriya race.

3. The Matsya says that Bahlika had a hundred
sons or lords of the Bahlikas.

4, Before her marriage to Santanu, Satyavatf had
a son, Krsna-dvaipayana or Vyasa, by Paragara : he
was therefore the half brother of Vicitravirya and
legally qualified to raise up offspring to him by his
widow. This law is abrogated in the present age.
The whole story of the sons of Santanu is told at
length in the Mahabharata.

5. The Mahabharata names some of them rather
differently and adds some particulars. Thus
Yaudheya was the son of Yudhisthira by his wife
Devika, daughter of Govasana of the Saivya tribe.
The son of Bhimasena was Sarvaga by Balandhara,
princess of Kasi; he had also Ghatotkaca by
Hidimba. Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna by
Subhadra. The wives and sons of the other two are
the same but Karenumati is termed a princess of
Cedi and Vijaya of Madra.

6. In the details immediately preceding, the
Puranas generally concur, deriving them probably
