282

THE VISNU-PURANAM

father; the second to his grandfather; and the
third to his great grandfather; and let him
satisfy those who are contented with the
wipings of his hand, by wiping it with the
roots of Kuga grass."

पिण्डैर्मातामहांस्तद्वद् गन्धमाल्यादिसंयुतै:।
पूजयित्वा द्विजाग्र्याणां दद्याच्याचमनं तत:॥४२॥
पितृभ्य: प्रथमं warn तन्भनस्को Tart!

सुस्वधेत्याशिषा युक्तां दद्याच्छक्त्या च दक्षिणाम्।।४३॥
दत्त्वा च दक्षिणां तेभ्यो वाचयेद्दैश्वदेविकान्।
प्रीयन्तामिह ये विश्वेदेवास्तेन इतीरयेत्।४४॥
तथेति चोक्ते तैर्विप्रै: प्रार्थनीयास्तथाशिष:।
पश्चाद्दिसर्जयेद देवान् ya पैत्र्यान्महीपते।।४५॥
मातामहानामप्येवं सह देवै: क्रम: स्मृत:।

भोजने व स्वशक्त्या च दाने wae विसर्जने॥४६॥

आपादशौचनात् पूर्वं कुर्याद् देवद्विजन्मसु॥

विसर्जनन्तु went पैत्रमातामहेषु au ४७॥

विसर्जयेत् प्रीतिवच: सम्मानाभ्यर्चितांस्तत:।

निवर्त्तताभ्यनुज्ञात आद्वारान्तादनुव्रजेत्॥४८॥

ततस्तु वैश्वदेवाख्यां कुर्यान्नित्यक्रियां बुध:।

भुञ्जीयाच्च समं पूज्य-भृत्य-बन्धुभिरात्मन:।। ४९॥

After presenting balls of food to his
maternal ancestors in the same manner,
accompanied by perfumes and incense, he is to
give to the principal Brahmanas water to rinse
their mouths; and then, with attention and
piety, he is to give the Brahmanas gifts,
according to his power, soliciting their
benedictions, | accompanied with the
exclamation 'Svadha'!''* Having made presents
to the Brahmanas, he is to address himself to
the gods, saying, 'May they who are the
Visvadevas be pleased with this oblation!'
Having thus said and the blessings to be
solicited having been granted by the
Brahmanas, he is to dismiss first the paternal
ancestors and then the gods. The order is the
same with the maternal ancestors and the gods
in respect to food, donation and dismissal,
commencing with the washing of the feet,
until the dismissing of the gods and

Brahmanas, the ceremonies are to be
performed first for paternal ancestors and then
for ancestors on the mother’s side. Let him
dismiss the Brihmanas with kindly speeches
and profound respect and attend upon them at
the end of the Sraddha, until permitted by
them to return. The wise man will then
perform the invariable worship of the
Visvadevas and take is own meal along with
his friends, his kinsmen and his dependants

श्राद्धैराप्यायिता दद्यु: सर्वान् कामान् पिततामहा:॥५०॥

` रजतस्य तथादानं कथासङ्कीर्तनादिकम्॥५ १॥

वर्ज्यनि कुर्वता arg कोपोऽध्वगमनं त्वरा।

भोक्तुरप्यत्र राजेन्द्र! त्रयमेतन्न शस्यते॥५२॥

विश्वेदेवा: सपितरस्तथा मातामहा FT!

कुलञ्चाप्यायते Yat ws श्राद्धं प्रकुर्वताम्।॥५३॥

"In this manner an enlightened householder
will cerebrate the obsequial worship of his
paternal and maternal ancestors, who, satisfied.
by his offerings, will grant him all his desires.
Three things are held pure at obsequies, a
daughter s son, a Nepal blanket and sesamum-
seeds;’* and the gift or naming or sight of
silver is also propitious.'° The person offering
a Sraddha should avoid anger, walking about
and hurry; these three. things are very
objectionable. The ViSvadevas and paternal
and maternal ancestors and the living members
of a man's family are all nourished by the
offerer of ancestral oblations.

सोमाधार: पितृगणो यागाधारस्तु चन्द्रमा:।
श्रेष्ठयोगिनियोगस्तु TATE Yur! शस्यते।।५४॥
सहस्रस्यापि विप्राणां योगी चेत् पुरत: स्थित:।
सर्वान् भोक्तॄंस्तारयति यजमानं तथा नृप॥ ५५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:।। १५॥

The class of Pitrs derives support from the
moon and the moon is sustained by acts of
austere devotion. Hence the appointment of
one who practises austerities is most desirable.

‘A Yogt set before a thousand Brahmanas
