BOOK I, CHAP. 9

63

त्वयावलोकिता: सद्य: शीलाद्यैरखिलैर्गुणै:।
aes gerd पुरुषा निर्गुणा अपि॥ १२ ८॥

स श्लाघ्य: स गुणी धन्य: स कुलीन: स बुद्धिमान्।

स शूर: स च विक्रान्तो यस्त्वया देवि वीक्षित:। १२९॥
सद्यो वैगुण्यमायान्ति शीलाद्या: सकला गुणा:।
पराङ्मुखी जगद्धात्रि यस्य त्वं विष्णुवल्लभे॥ १३ ०॥

न ते वर्णयितुं शक्ता गुणान् जिह्वापि aera:

प्रसीद देवि wafer मास्मांस्त्याक्षी: कदाचन।। १३ VU

You are the mother of all beings, as the god
of gods. Hari, is their, father; and this world,
whether animate or inanimate, is pervaded by
you and Visnu. Oh you who purify all things,
forsake not our treasures, our granaries, our
dwellings, our dcpendants, our persons, our
wives: abandon not our children, our friends,
our lineage, our jewels, oh you who abide on
the bosom of the god of gods. They whom you
desert are forsaken-by truth, by purity, and
goodness, by every amiable and excellent
quality; whilst the base and worthless upon
whom you look favourably become
immediately endowed with all excellent
qualifications, with families, and with power.
He on whom your countenance is turned is
honourable, amiable, prosperous. wise, and of
exalted birth; a hero of irresistible prowess:
but all his merits and his advantages are
converted into worthlessness from whom,
beloved of Visnu, mother of the world, you
averted your face. The tongues of Brahma are
unequal to celcbrate your excellence. Be
propitious to me, oh goddess, lotus-eyed, and
never forsake me more.”

WHR sara

एवं श्री: संस्तुता सम्यक् प्राह देवी शतक्रतुम्।

श्रृण्वतां सर्वदेवानां सर्वभूतस्थिता FET १३ २॥

Parasara continucd— Being thus praised, the
gratified Sri, abiding in all creatures, and
heard by all beings, replicd to the god of a
hundred rites (Satakratu);

श्रीरुवाच
परितुष्टास्मि देवेश स्तोत्रेणानेन ते हरे।

at वृणीष्व यस्त्विष्टो वरदाहं तवागता।। १३ 3!

Sri इक्षंत- “I am pleased, monarch of the
gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me
what you desire: I have comc to fulfil your
wishes.”

इन्द्र उवाच

वरदा यदि मे देवि वरार्हो यदि वाप्यहम्।
त्रैलोक्यं न त्वया त्याज्यमेष मेऽस्तु वर: WT १३४॥
स्तोत्रेण यस्तथैतेन ai स्तोष्यत्यब्धिसम्भवे।
स त्वया न परित्याज्यो द्वितीयोऽस्तु att मम।। १३ ५॥

Indra replied— “If. Goddess, you will grant
my prayers; if it lam worthy of your bounty ';
be this my first request, that the three worlds
may never again be deprived of your prescnce.
My second supplication, daughter of ocean, is,
that you will not forsake him who shall
celebrate your praises in the words I have
addressed to you.” “T will not abandon,”

श्रीरुवाच

त्रैलोक्यं त्रिदशग्रेष्ठ न संत्यक्ष्यामि वासव।

दत्तो वरो मया यस्ते स्तोत्राराधनतुष्टया।। १३६॥

यश्च सायं तथा Wet: स्तोत्रेणानेन मानव:।

मां स्तोष्यति न तस्याहं भविष्यामि पराङ्मुखी।। १३७॥

The goddess answered, “the three worlds

again : this your first boon is granted; for lam
gratified by your praises: and further, I will
never turn my face away from that mortal who
morning and evening shall repeat the hymn
with which you have addressed me.
पराशर उवाच.

एवं at ददौ tat देवराजाय वै पुरा।

मैत्रेय श्रीर्महाभाग स्तोत्राराधनतोषिता।। १३ ८॥

भृगो: ख्यात्यां समुत्पन्ना sit: पूर्वमुदथे: पुन:।

देव-दानवयत्नेन प्रसूतामृतमन्थने॥ १३ ९॥

एवं यथा जगत्स्वामी देवदेवो जनार्द्दन:।

saa करोत्येष तथा श्रीस्तत्सहायिनी।। १४०॥

पुनश्च पद्मादुद्धूता आदित्योऽभूद् यदा हरि:।

यदा तु भार्गवो रामस्तदाभूद् धरणी त्वियम्।। १४१॥

राघवत्वेऽभवत् सीता रुक्मिणी कृष्णजन्मनि।
