BOOK III, CHAP. 17

287

"May the first of beings, the divine Visnu, be
pleased with the words that we are about to
address to him, in order to propitiate the lord
of all worlds; from which mighty cause all
created things have originated and into whom
they shall again dissolve! Who is able to
declare his praise? We, who have been put to
shame by the triumph of our foes, will glorify
you, although your true power and might be
not within the reach of words.

त्वमुर्वी सलिलं वह्निर्वायुराकाशमेव च।
समस्तमन्त:करणं प्रधानं AAT: पुमान्॥ १४॥
एकं तवैतद् भूतात्मन्! मूर्त्तमूर्त्तमयं वपु:।
आब्रह्मस्तम्बपर्यन्तं स्थानकालविभेदवत्।। १५॥

You are earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
crude matter and primeval soul: all this
elementary creation, with or without visible
form, is your body; all from Brahmé to a
stock, diversified by place and time.

तत्रेश! तव यत्पूर्वं त्वन्नाभिकमलोद्भवम्।

wee विश्वोपकाराय तस्मै ब्रह्मात्मने नम:॥ १६॥

वयमेतत् स्वरूपं यत् तस्मै देवात्मने नम:॥ १७॥

Glory to you, who are Brahma, your first
form, evolved from the lotus springing from
the navel, for the purpose of creation. Glory to

you, who are Indra, the sun, Rudra, the Vasus;
fire, the winds an even also ourselves.

age तव गोविन्द! तस्मै दैत्यात्मने नम:॥ १८॥

नातिज्ञानवहा यस्मिन् area: स्तिमिततेजसि।

शब्दादिलोभि Brat तुभ्यं यक्षात्मने नम:॥ १९॥

Glory to you, Govinda, who are all
demons, whose essence is arrogance and want
of discrimination, unchecked by patience or
self-control. Glory to you, who are the Yaksas,
whose nature is charmed with sounds and
whose frivolous hearts perfect knowledge
cannot pervade.

क्रौर्यमायामयं घोरं यच्च रूपं तवासितम्।

निशाचरात्मने तस्मै नमस्ते पुरुषोत्तमम्॥ २०॥

स्वर्गस्थधर्मिसद्धर्म-फलोपकरणं तव।
धर्माख्यञ्च तथा रूपं नमस्तस्मै जनार्दन।। २१॥

Glory to you, who are all fiends, that walk
by night, sprung from the quality of darkness,
fierce, fraudulent and cruel. Glory to you,
Janardana, who are that piety which is the
instrument of recompensing the virtues of
those who abide in heaven.

हर्षप्रायमसंसर्गि गतिमद् गमनादिषु।
सिद्धाख्यं तव age wet सिद्धात्मने नम:।। २२॥
द्विजिह्वं तव यद्रूपं तस्मै नागात्मने नम:।। २३॥
Glory to you, who are one with the saints,
whose perfect nature is ever blessed and
traverses unobstructed all permeable elements.

Glory to you, who are one with the serpent
race, double-tongued, impetuous, cruel,

‘insatiate of enjoyment and abounding with

wealth.
अवबोधि च यच्छान्तमदोषमपकल्मषम्।
ॠषिरूपात्मने तस्मै विष्णो रूपाय FAA २४॥
भक्षयत्यथ कल्पान्ते भूतानि यदवारितम्।
त्वद्रूपं पुण्डरीकाक्ष! तस्मै कालात्मने नम:।। २५॥

Glory to you, who are one with the Rsis,

_whose nature is free from sin or defect and is

identified with wisdom and tranquillity. Glory
to you, oh lotus-eyed, who are one with time,
the form that devours, without remorse, all
created things at the termination of the Kalpa.

सम्भक्ष्य सर्वभूतानि देवादीन्यविशेषत:।
नृत्यत्यन्ते च यद्रूपं तस्मै रुद्रात्मने AA २६॥

Glory to you, who are Rudra, the being that
dances with delight after he has swallowed up
all things, the gods and the rest, without
distinction.

wart wal यच्च कर्मणां CACC Hr tel
जनार्दन! नमस्तस्मै त्वद्रूपाय नरात्मने।। २७॥
Glory to you, Janardana, who are man, the

agent in developing the results of that activity
which proceeds from the quality of foulness.
