428

THE VISNU-PURANAM

यावद्भौमहोत्पात दोषो नाभिभवेद् ब्रजम्।। २५॥

“‘We cannot remain in this place," said
they; ‘‘let us go to some other part of the
forest; for here many evil signs threaten us
with destruction; the death of Pitana, the up-
setting of the waggon and the fall of the trees
without their being blown down by the wind.
Let us depart hence without delay and go to
Vrindavan, where terrestrial prodigies may no
more disturb us."

इति कृत्वा मतिं wa mF व्रजौकस:।
विलम्ब्यताम्॥ २६॥

तत: AUT प्रययु: शकटैर्गोधनैस्तथा।

यूथशो वत्सबालांश्च कालयन्तो व्रजौकस:॥ २७॥

द्रव्यावयवनिर्धूतं क्षणमात्रेण तत् तथा।
काक-काकी-समीकीर्ण व्रजस्थानमभूद् FE २८॥
ger भगवता कृष्णेनाक्किष्टकर्म्मणा।

शुभेन मनसा ध्यातं wat वृद्धिमभीप्सता।। २९॥
ततस्तत्रातिरूक्षेऽपि धर्म्मकाले द्विजोत्तम।
प्रावृट्काल इवोद्भूतं Aa शस्यं समन्तत:॥३०॥
न समावासित: सर्वो ब्रजो Garay तत:।
शकटीवाटपर्य्यन्तश्चन्दरार्द्धकारसंस्थिति:।। ३ १॥।

Having thus resolved, the inhabitants of
Vraja communicated their intention to their
families and desired them to move without
delay. Accordingly they set off with their
waggons and their cattle, driving before them
their bulls and cows and calves; the fragments
of their household stores they threw away and
in an instant Vraja was over-spread with
flights of crows. Vrindavan was chosen by Krs
na, whom acts do not affect, for the sake of
providing for the nourishment of the kine; for
there in the hottest season the new grass
springs up as verdantly as in the rains. Having
repaired, then, from Vraja to Vrindavan, the
inhabitants of the former drew up their wagons
in the form of a crescent.

वत्सपालौ च संवृत्तौ राम-दामोदरौ तत:।
एकस्तानस्थितौ गोष्ठे-चेरतुर्बाललीलया॥ ३ २॥

बर्हिपत्रकृतापीडौ वन्यपुष्पावतंसकौ।
गोपवेणुकृतातोद्य-पत्रवाद्यक्रृस्वनौ।। ३ ३॥
काकपक्षधरौ बालौ कुमाराविव पावकी।

हसन्तौ च रमन्तौ च चेरतुस्तौ महाबलौ।। ३४॥
क्वचिद्धसन्तावन्योन्यं क्रीड्मानौ तथापरै:।
गोपपुत्रै: समं वत्सांश्चारयन्तौ विचेरतु:।। ३५॥
कालेन गच्छता at तु सप्तवर्षॆ महाब्रजे।

सर्वस्य जगत: पालौ वत्सपालौ बभूवतु:।। ३६॥

As the two boys, Rama and Damodara,
grew up, they were ever together in the same
place and engaged in the same boyish sports.
They made themselves crests of the peacocks’
plumes and garlands of forest flowers and
musical instruments of leaves and reeds or
played upon the pipes used by the cowherds;
their hair was trimmed like the wings of the
crow,’ and they resembled two young princes,
portions of the deity of war : they were robust
and they roamed about, always laughing and
playing, sometimes with each other,
sometimes with other boys; driving along with
the young cowherds the calves to pasture.
Thus the two guardians of the world were
keepers of cattle, until they had attained seven
years of age, in the cow-pens of Vrindavana.

प्रावृटकालस्ततोऽतीव मेघौघस्थगिताम्बर:।
aya वारिधाराभिरैक्यं कुर्वन् दिशामिव।। ३७॥
प्ररूढनवशस्याढ्या शक्रगोपाचिता मही।

तदा मारकतीवासीत् पद्मरागविभूषिता।। ३ ८॥
मनांसि दुर्विनीतानां प्राप्य लक्ष्मीं नवामिव।॥। ३९॥
न रेजेऽन्तरितश्चन्द्रो निर्म्मलो मलिनैर्घनै:।
`सद्वाक्यावादो मूर्खाणां प्रगल्भाभिरिवोक्तिभि:।।४०॥
निगुणेनापि चापेन शक्रस्य गगने पदम्।
अवाप्यताविवेकस्य नृपस्येव UI ४१॥
मेघपृष्ठे बलाकानां रराज विमला तति:।

दुवुत्ते वृत्तचेष्टेव कुलीन्सायतिशोभना।। ४२॥

न बबन्धाम्बरे Sel विद्युदत्यन्तचञ्चला।

मैत्रीव प्रवरे पुंसि दुर्ज्जनेन प्रयोजिता।॥४३॥
