42

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and Vedana (torture), who became their wives.
The son of Bhaya and Maya was the destroyer
of living creatures, or Mrtyu (death); and
Duhkha (pain) was the offspring of Naraka
and Vedana, The children of Mrtyu were
Vyadhi (disease), Jara (decay), Soka (sorrow).
Trsna (greediness). and Krodha (wrath). These
are all called the inflictors, of misery, and are
characterised as the progency of Vice
(Adharma). They are all without wives,
without posterity, without the faculty to
procreate; they are the terrific forms of Visnu,
and perpetually operate as causes of the
destruction of this world. On the contrary,
Daksa and the other Rsis, the elders of
mankind, tend perpetually to influence its
renovation : whilst the Manus and their sons,
the heroes endowed with mighty power, and
treading in the path of truth, as constantly
contribute to its preservation.

मैत्रैय zara

येयं नित्या स्थितिर्व्रह्मन् नित्यसर्गस्तथैरित:।।

नित्याभावाश्च aut वै raed मम कथ्यताम्।। ३६॥

Maitreya said—Tell me, Brahman, what is

the essential nature of these revolutions,
perpetual preservation, perpetual creation, and
perpetual destruction.
US उवाच

सर्गस्थितिविनाशांश्च भगवान् मधुसूदन:।
तैस्तैरूपैरचिन्त्यात्मा करोत्यव्याहतान् विभु:॥ ३७॥
नैमित्तिक: प्राकृतिकस्तथैवात्यन्तिको द्विज:।
नित्यश्च सर्वभूतानां प्रलयोऽयं चतुर्विध:॥ ३ ८॥
ब्राह्मो नैमित्तिकस्तत्र यच्छेते जगत: पति:।

प्रयाति wpa चैव ब्रह्माण्डं प्रकृतौ लयम्॥३९॥
ज्ञानादात्यन्तिक प्रोक्तो योगिन: परमात्मनि।

fra: ada जातानं यो विनाशो दिवानिशम्॥४०॥
प्रसूति: प्राक्तर्या तु सा सृष्टि: प्राकृती स्मृता।
दैनन्दिनी तथा प्रोक्ता यान्तरप्रलयादनु।।४१॥
भूतान्यनुदिनं यत्र जायन्ते मुनिसत्तम।

नित्य: सर्ग: स तु प्रोक्त: पुराणार्थविचक्षणै:।। ४२॥

Pardsara said— Madhusiidana, whose
essence is incomprehensible, in the forms of
these (partriarchs and Manus), is the author of
the uninterrupted vicissitudes of creation,
preservation, and destruction. The dissolution
of all things is of four kinds; Naimittika.
‘occasional;' Prakrtika, 'elemental;' Atyantika.
“absolute;' Nitya, ‘perpetual’®. The first, also
termed the Brahma dissolution, occurs when
the sovereign of the world reclines in sleep. In
the second, the mundane egg resolves into the
primary element, from whence it was derived.
Absolute non-existence of the world is the
absorption of the sage, through knowledge,
into supreme spirit. Perpetual destruction is
the constant disappearance, day and night, of
all that are born. The productions of Pratmi
form the creation that is termed the elemental
(Prakrta). That which ensues after a (minor)
dissolution is called ephemeral creation: and
the daily generation of living things is termed
by those who are versed in the Puranas,
constant creation.

एवं सर्वशरीरेषु भगवान् भूतभावन:।

संस्थित: कुरुते विष्णुरुत्पत्तिस्थितिसंयमान्।। ४३॥

सृष्टिस्थितिविनाशानां शक्तय: सर्वदेहिषु।

वैष्णव्य: परिवर्त्तन्ते मैत्रेयाऽहर्निशं सदा॥४४॥

गुणत्रयमयं Sag Ter शक्तित्रयं महत्।

योऽतियाति स चात्वेव परं नावर्त्तते पुन:।४५॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे सप्तमोऽध्याय:।

In this manner the mighty Visnu, whose
essence is the elements, abides in all bodies,
and brings about production, existence, and
dissolution. The faculties of Visnu to create, to
preserve, and to destroy, operate successively,
Maitreya, in alt corporeal beings and at all
seasons; and he who frees himself from the
influence of these three faculties, which are
essentially composed of the three qualities
(goodness, foulness, and darkness), goes to the
supreme sphere, from whence he never again
returns.

3 oie ok 3
