538

THE VISNU-PURANAM

at दग्ध्वा जगत् सर्वरुद्ररूपी जनार्द्दन:।
मुखनि:श्वासजान् मेघान् करोति मुनिसत्तम।। ३ of
ततो गजकुलप्रख्यास्तडित्वन्तो निनादिन:।
उत्तिष्ठन्ति तदा व्योम्नि घोरा: संवर्त्तका घना:।। ३ १॥
केचिन्नीलोत्पलश्यामा: केचित् कुमुदसन्निभा:।
धूमवर्णा घना: केचित् किचित् पीता: पयोधरा:॥ ३ २॥
केचिद्रासभवर्णाभा लाक्षारसनिभास्तथा।
केचिद्वैदूर्य्यसङ्काशा इन्द्रनीलनिभा: परे।। ३३॥
इन्द्रगोपनिभा: केचिन्मन:शिलनिभास्तथा।। ३.४॥
Janarddana, in the person of Rudra, having
consumed the whole world, breathes forth
heavy clouds; and those called Samvartta,
resembling vast elephants in bulk, overspread
the sky, roaring, and darting lightenings. Some
are as black as the blue lotus; some are white
as the water-lily; some are dusky, like smoke;
and some are yellow; some are of a dun
colour, like that of an ass; some like ashes
sprinkled on the forehead; some are deep blue,
as the fapis lazuli; some azure, like the
sapphire; some are white, as the conch or the
jasmine; and some are black, as collyrium;
some are of bright red, like the lady-bird;
some are of the fierceness of red arsenic; and
some are like the wing of the painted jay.

चाषपत्रनिभा: केचिदुत्तिष्ठन्ति घना धना:।

केचित् पुरवराकारा: केचित् पर्वतसन्निभा:।। ३५॥
कूटागारनिभ्राश्चान्ये केचित् स्थूलनिभा घना:।
महारावा महाकाया: पूरयन्ति नभस्तलम्॥३६॥
वर्षन्तस्ते महासारैस्तमग्निमतिभैरवम्।
शमयन्त्यखिलं विप्र! त्रैलोक्यान्तरविस्तृतम्।। ३७॥
We चाग्नौ we ashe वर्षाणामनिवारिता:।
`लावयन्तो जगत् सर्वं वर्षन्ति मुनिसत्तम।। ३ ८॥
धाराभिरक्षमात्राभि: प्लावयित्वाखिलं भुवम्।
भुवर्लोकं wang प्लावयन्ति fed द्विज।।३९॥
अन्धकारीकृते लोके नष्टे स्थावरजङ्घमे।

वर्षन्तिं ते महामेघा वर्षाणामधिकं शतम्॥४०॥

Such are these massy clouds in hue: in
form some resemble towns, some mountains,
some are like houses and hovels, and some are
like columns. Mighty in size, and loud in
thunder, they fill all space. Showering down
torrents of water, these clouds quench the
dreadful fires which involve the three worlds,
and then they rain uninterruptedly for a
hundred years, and delung the whole world.
Pouring down in drops as large as dice, these
rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle
region, and inundate heaven. The world is now
enveloped in darkness, and all things, animate
or inanimate, having perished, the clouds
continue to pour down their waters for more
than a hundred years.

५.३.३:४

NOTES

1. The first is catled Naimittaka, ‘occasional’ or
‘incidental’ or Brahmya, as occasioned by the
intervals of Brahm&’s days; the destruction of
creatures, though not of the substance of the world,
occurring during his night. The general resolution
of the elements into their primitive source, or
Prakrti, is the Prakrtika destruction, and occurs at
the end of Brahma’s life. The third, the absolute or
final. Atyantika, is individual annihilation; Moksa,
exemption for ever from future existence. The
Bhagavata here notices the fourth kind, of which
mention occurred in a preceding passage (Bk. I. Ch.
III). Nitya or constant dissolution; explaining it to
be the imperceptible change that all things suffer in
the various stages of growth and decay, life and
death. The various conditions of beings subject to
change are occasioned by that constant dissolution
of life which is rapidly produced by the resistless
stream of time, taking every thing perpetually
aways: ह्रियमाणस्य नित्यदा
`परिणामिनामवस्थास्ता: जन्मप्रलयहेतव:। The Vayu describes
but three kinds of Pralaya, omitting the Nitya.

2. Maitreya has a rather indifferent memory (see
Bk. I. Ch. IID; but the periods specified in the two
places do not agree. In the first book two
Pararddhas, as equal to one hundred years of
Brahma, are 311,040, 000,000,000 years of
mortals.
