BOOK I, CHAP. 15

एवमुक्त्वा तु त्ते सर्वे चक्षुषस्यान्तरे मनो:।
मारीचात् कश्यपाज्जातास्ते दित्या दक्षकन्यया।। १३ ०॥
तत्र विष्णुश्च शक्रश्च जज्ञाते पुनरेव च।

अर्यमा चैव धाता च त्वष्टा पूषा तथैव च।। १३ i
विवस्वान् सविता चैव मित्रो वरुण एव च।

अंशो भगश्चादितिजा आदित्या द्वादश स्मृता:।। १३ २॥
चाक्षुषस्यान्तरे पूर्वमासन् ये तुषिता: सुरा:।
वैवस्वतेऽन्तरे ते वै आदित्या द्वादश स्मृता:॥ १३ ३॥

The daughters of Daksa who were married
to Kasyapa were Aditi, Diti, Danu. Arishta,
Surasa, Surabhi, Vinata, Tamra, Krodhavasa,
Ida, Khasa Kadru, and Muni;"’ whose progeny
I will describe to you. There were twelve
celebrated deities in a former Manvantara,
called Tuahkas,”” who, upon the approach of
the present period, or in the reign of the last
Manu, C4ksusa, assembled, and said to one
another, “Come, let us quickly enter into the
womb of Aditi, that we may be born in the
next Manvantara. for thereby we shall again
enjoy the rank of gods:” and accordingly they
were born the sons of Kasyapa, the son of
Marici, by Aditi, the daughter of Daksa;
thence named the twelve Adityas, whose
appellations were respectively, Visnu, Sakra,
Aryaman, Dhiti, Tvastri, Pushan, Vivasvat,
Savita, Mitra, Varuna, Anga. and Bhaga.”!
These, who in the Caksusa Manvantara were
the gods called Tusitas, were called the twelve
Adityas in the Manvantara of Vaivasvata.

या: सप्तविंशति: प्रोक्ता: सोमपन्त्योऽथ सुव्रता:।
सर्वा मक्षत्रयोगिन्यस्तन्नाम्न्यश्चैव ता: स्मृता:॥ १३४॥
तासामपत्यान्यभवन् दीप्तान्यमिततेजसा।
अरिष्टमेमिपत्नीनामयत्यानीह षोडश।। १३५॥
बहुपुत्रस्य विदुषश्चतस्रो विद्युत: स्मृता:।
प्रत्यङ्गिरसजा: श्रेष्ठा ऋचो ब्रह्मर्षिसत्कृता:॥ १३ ६॥
कृशाश्वस्य तु देवर्षेर्देवप्रहरणा: स्मृता:।

Ud युगसहस्रान्ते जायन्ते Fata हि॥ १३७॥

The twenty-seven daughters of the
patriarch who became the virtuous wives of
the moon were all known as the nymphs of the

101

lunar constellations, which were called by
their names, and had children who were
brilliant through their great splendour”. The
wives of Aristanemi bore him _ sixteen
children,” The daughters of Bahuputra were
the four lightnings”. The excellent
Pratyangirasa Richas were the children of
Angiras”. descended from the holy sage: and
the deified weapons of the gods ° were the
progeny of Krsasva.

ad देवगणास्तात त्रयस्तिंशत् तु छन्दजा:।
ततेषामपीह सततं निरोधोत्पत्तिरुच्यते।। १३ ८॥
यथा सूर्यस्य मैत्रेय उदयास्तमयाविह।

एवं देवनिकायास्ते सम्भवन्ति युगे युगे।। १३ ९॥

These classes of thirty-three divinities”’ are
born again at the end of a thousand ages,
according to their own pleasure; and their
appearance and disappearance is here spoken
of as birth and death: but, Maitreya, these
divine personages exist age after age in the
same manner as the sun sets and uses again.

दित्या: पुत्रद्वयं जज्ञे कश्यपादिति न श्रुतम्।
हिरण्यकशिपुश्चैव हिरण्याक्षश्च दुर्जय:।। १४०॥
सिंहका चाभवत् कन्या विप्रचित्ते परिग्रह:।
हिरण्यकशिपो: पुत्राश्चत्वार: प्रथितौजस:।। १४१॥
SYS BET प्रह्लादश्चैव बुद्धिमान्।

संह्लादश्च महावीर्या दैत्यवंशविवर्द्धना:॥ १४ २॥
तेषां मध्ये महाभाग सर्वत्र WAST वशी।

प्रह्लाद: परमां भक्तिं य उवाह जनार्दने।। १४३॥

न ददाह च यं विप्र वासुदेवे हृदि fer evil
महार्णवान्त: सलिले स्थितस्य चलतो मही।
चचाल AHA यस्य पाशबद्धस्य धीमत:।॥ १४५॥

It has been related to us, that Diti had two
sons by Kasyapa, named Hiranyakasipu and
the invincible Hiranyaksa: she had also a
daughter, Sinhikdé, the wife of Vipracitti.
Hiranyakasipu was the father of four mighty
sons, Anuhlada, Hldda, the wise Prahlada, and
the heroic Sanhlada. the augmentor of the
Daitya race’*, Amongst these, the illustrious
