184

THE VISNU-PURANAM

leaf, the shoot, the stem, the bud, the fruit, the
milk, the grain, the chaff, the ear,
spontaneously evolve when they are in
approximation with the subsidiary means of
growth (or earth and water), so gods, men, and
other beings, involved in many actions (or
necessarily existing in those states which are
the consequences of good or evil acts),
become manifested only in their full growth,
through the influence of the energy of Visnu.

स च विष्णु: परं ब्रह्म यत: सर्वमिदं जगत्।
जगच्च यो aa चेदं यस्मिंश्च लयमेष्यति॥४०॥
ae ब्रह्म तत् परं धाम सदसत् परमं पदम्।
यस्य सर्वमभेदेन यतश्चैतच्चराचरम्।॥४१॥

स एव मूलप्रकृतिर्व्यक्तरूपी जगच्च स:।
तस्मिन्नेव लयं ad याति तत्र च तिष्ठति।। ४२॥
al क्रियाणां स च इज्यते cA:

स एव तत्कर्मफलञ्च तस्य तत्।

स्रुगादि यत्साधनमप्यशेषतो-

हरेर्न किञ्चिद् व्यतिरिक्तमस्ति वै॥४३॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे सप्तमोऽध्याय:।

This Visnu is the supreme spirit (Brahma),
from whence all this world proceeds, who is
the world, by whom the world subsists, and in
whom it will be resolved. That spirit (or
Brahma) is the supreme state of Visnu, which
is the essence of all that is visible or invisible;
with which all that is, is identical; and whence
all animate and inanimate existence is derived.
He is primary nature: he, in a perceptible form,
is the world: and in him all finally melts;
through him all things endure. He is the
performer of the rites of devotion; he is the
rite: he is the fruit which it bestows: he is the
implements by which it is performed. There is
nothing besides the illimitable Hari.

NOTES

1. Bhtir-loka, the terrestrial sphere, is earth and
the lower regions; from thence to the sun is the
Bhuvar-loka, or atmospheric sphere; and from the
sun to dhruva is the Svar-loka, or heaven; as

subsequently explained in the text, and in other
Puranas.

2. A similar account of the situations and
distances of the planets occurs in the Padma,
Karma, and Vayu Puranas. The Bhagavata has one
or two varieties, but they are of no great
importance.

3. An account of these Lokas is met with only in
a few of the Puranas, and is not much more
detailed in them than in our text. The Vayu is most
circumstantial. According to that authority, Mahar,
which is so called from a mystical term Maha, is
the abode of the Ganadevas, the Y4mas and others,
who are the regents or rulers of the Kalpa, the
Kalpadhikaris: they are so designated also in the
Kirma. The Kasi Khanda refers the name to
Mahas, light, the sphere being invested with
radiance (महसावृतं). Its inhabitants are also called
lords of the Kalpa: but the commentator explains
this to denote Bhrgu and the other patriarchs,
whose lives endure for a day of Brahma. The
different accounts agree in stating, that when the
three lower spheres are consumed by fire, Mahar-
loka is deserted by its tenants, who repair to the
next sphere, or Jana-loka. Jana-loka, according to
the Vayu, is the residence of the Rsis and demigods
during the night of Brahma, and is termed Jana
because the patriarchs are the progenitors of
mankind. The Kasi Khanda agrees with the Visnu
in peopling it with Sanandana and the other ascetic
sons of Brahma, and with Yogis like themselves.
These are placed by the Vayu in the Tapo-loka, and
they and the other sages, and the demigods, after
repeated appearances in the world, become at last
Vairajas in the Brahma or Satya-loka. After many
devine ages of residence there with Brahma, they
are, along with him, absorbed, at the end of his
existence, into the indiscrete: अव्यक्ते संप्रलीयन्ते wafer,
ब्रह्मलोके तु wet वैराजके गते। The commentator on the
Kasi Khanda explains Vairaja to mean relating to,
or derived from, Brahma or Viraj: हिरण्यगर्भेणोत्पादिता
वैराजा:। The Vairajas are there, as in the Visnu
Purana, placed in the Tapo-loka, and are explained
to be ascetics, mendicants, anchorets, and penitents,
who have completed a course of rigorous
austerities: रत्यादिसुतप:  fereamio ये तपोधना:।
ब्रह्मायुषस्तपोलोके तु वसन्त्यकुतोभया:। It may by doubted,
however, if the Pauraniks have very precise notions
regarding these spheres and their inhabitants. The
