278

THE VISNU-PURANAM

दिवि cam: 1 आदि cat इति ख्याता। तेषां WA समाख्याता गणास्ते
लोकपूजिता:। अमूर्त्तयस्त्रयस्तेषां चत्वारस्तु समूर्त्तय:।। Again; in
the same work we have the incorporeal Pitrs called
Vairajas, from being the Prajapati Viraja; अमूर्त्तय:
पितृगणा: पुत्रास्ते वै प्रजापते:। विरजस्य द्विजा: श्रेष्ठा वैराजा इति
fag: || The Matsya agrees with this latter statement
and adds that the gods worship them; अमूर्त्तय: पितृगणा
विराजस्य WIT: | यजन्ति यान् देवगणां वैराजा इति विश्रुता:। The
Hari Varhnsa has the same statement, but more
precisely distinguishes the Vairdjas as one class
only of the incorporeal Pitrs. The commentator
States the same, calling the three incorporeal Pitrs,
Vairajas, Agnisvattas and, Varhisads; and the four
corporeal orders, Suk4las, Angirasas, Susvadhas
and Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the
fathers of Mena, the mother of Uma. Their abode is
variously termed the Santénika, Sanatana and Soma
loka. As the posterity of Viraja, they are the
Somasads of Manu. The other classes of Pitrs the
three Puranas agree with Manu in representing as
the sons of the patriarchs and in general assign to
them the same offices and posterity. They are the
following :

Agnisvattas—sons of Marici and Pitrs of the gods
(Manu-Matsya, Padma) : living in Soma-loka and
parents of Achchodaé (Matsya, Padma, Hari
Varhsa). The Vayu makes them residents of Viraja-
loka, sons of Pulastya, Pitrs of the demigods and
demons and parents of Pivari; omitting the next
order of Pitrs, to whom these circumstances more
accurately refer. The commentator on the Hari
Varia derives the name from Agnisu (9), 'in or
by oblations to fire.' and Atta (आत्ता:), ‘obtained,’
‘invoked.’

Varhisads-sons of Atri and Pitrs of the demons
(Manu) : sons of Pulastya. Pitrs of the demons,
residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivarl (Matsya,
Padma. Hari V).

These three are the formless or incorporeal Pitrs.

Somap4s—descendants of Bhrgu or sons of Kavi
by Svadha, the daughter of Agni; and Pitrs of the
Brahmanas (Manu and Vayu Purana). The Padma
calls them Usmapias. The Hari Varhsa calls the
Somapas to whom it ascribes the same descent as
the Vayu, the Pitrs of the Siidras; and the Sukdlas
the Pitrs of the Brahmanas.

Havismantas—in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras
and Pitrs of the Ksatriyas (Manu, Vayu. Matsya,
Padma, Hari VarhSa).

Ajyapas-sons of Kardama, Pitrs of the Vaisyas
Kamaduhaloka (Manu); but the law giver calls
them the sons of Pulastya. The Pitrs of the Vaisyas
are called Kavyas in the Nandi Upapurana; and in
the Hari Varhsa and its comment they are termed
Susvadhas, sons of Kardama, descended from
Pulaha.

Suk4lins~sons of Vasistha and Pitrs of the
Sidras (Manu and Vayu Purana). They are not
mentioned in the Padma. The Matsya inserts the
name and descent, but specifies them as amongst
the incorporeal Pitrs : अमूर्तिमन्त: पितरो वशिष्ठस्य gare: |
wey ते मानसा a4 8 धर्ममूर्त्तय:।। It may be suspected that

-the passage is corrupt. The Hari VarhSa makes the

Sukalas sons of Vasistha, the Pitrs of the
Brahmanas; and gives the title of Somapds to the
Pitrs of the Sidras. In general this work follows the
Vayu; but with omissions and transpositions, as if it
had carelessly mutilated its original.

Besides these Pitrs or progenitors, other
heavenly beings are sometimes made to adopt a
similar character; thus Manu says, "the wise call
our fathers Vasus; our paternal grandfathers,
Rudras; our paternal great grandfathers, Adityas;
agreeably to a text of the Vedas: that is, these
divine beings are to be mediated upon along with
and as not distinct from, progenitors. Heméadri
quotes the Nandi Upapurana for a different practice
and directs Visnu to be identified with the father,
Brahma with the grandfather and Siva with the
great grandfather. This, however, is Saivya
innovation. The Vaisnavas direct Aniruddha to be
regarded as one's-self and Pradyumna, Sankarsana
and Vasudeva as the three ancestors. Again, they
are identified with Varuna, Prajapatya and Agni; or
again with months, seasons and years. Nirnaya
Sindhu, p. 284. It may be doubted how far any of
these correctly represent the original notions
inculcated by the texts of the Vedas, from which, in
the most essential particulars, they are derived.

2. When the Yogatara or principal star seen, is
the chief star or stars of these asterisms or lunar
mansions respectively, see the table given by
Colebrooke. As. Res. IX. P. 346. The first three
named in the text are stars in Scorpio, Libra and
Arcturus; the second three are stars in Cancer,
Gemini and Oriorr; and the third are stars in the
Dolphin, Pegasus and Aquarius.

३५9९
