THE VISNU-PURANAM

392
CHAPTER 24
चतुविंशोऽध्याय:

(कलिकालस्थित-नृपाणां कलिधर्म्मस्य च वर्णनम्।
राजवंशवर्णनोपसंहारश्च।)

पराशरं उवाच

asa रिपुञ्जयो am बार्हद्रथोऽन्त्य:) wea सुनिको
नामामात्यो भविष्यति।। १॥

स चैनं स्वामिनं हत्वा स्वपुत्रं प्रद्योतनामनमभिषेक्ष्यति।
तस्यापि पालकनामा war भविता। ततश्च विशाखयूप:,
waa, जनक:, तस्य च नन्दिवर्द्धन, इत्येते
अष्टत्रिंशददुत्तरमब्दशतं पञ्चप्रद्योता: पृथिवीं भोक्ष्यन्ति।। २॥

The last of the Brhadratha dynasty,
Ripufijaya, will have a minister named

Sunika,’ who having killed his sovereign, will
place his won Pradyota upon the throne; his
son will be Palaka;? his son will be
Visakhayipa,’ his son will be Janaka® and his
son will be Nandivardhana.° These five kings
of the house of Pradyota will reign over the
earth for a hundred and thirty-eight years.’

ततश्च शिशुनाग:, तत्पुत्रश्च काकवर्णो भविता। तत्पुत्र:
aman, तस्यापि क्षत्रौजा:, तत्पुत्रो विद्मसार:,

ततश्चाजातशत्रु:, तस्माच्च दर्भक:, दतर्भकाच्चोदयाश्व:)
तस्मादपि नन्दिवर्द्धन:, aa महानन्दीस, इत्येते शैशुनागा
दश भूमिपालस्त्रीणि वर्षशतानि द्विषष्ट्यधिकानि
भविष्यन्ति।। ३॥

The next prince will be Sisunaga,* his son
will be Kakavarna,’ his son will be Ks
emadharman,'’ his son will be Ksatraujas,
his son will be Vidmisara,'* his son will be
Ajatagatru,’ his son will be Dharbaka;'* his
son will be Udayagva;'> his son will also be

Nandivarddhana; and his son will be
Mahanandi.'° These ten Saigunagas will be
kings of the earth for three hundred and sixty-
two years.”

महानन्दिसुत: शूद्रागर्भोद्भवोऽतिलुब्यो महापद्मानन्द:
परशुराम इवापरोऽखिलक्षत्रान्तकारी भविता।।४॥

तत: प्रभृति शूद्रा भूमिपाल भविष्यन्ति, स
चैकच्छत्रामनुल्लङ्घितशासनो महापद्म: पृथिवीं भोक्ष्यति।। ५॥

तस्याप्यब्टौ सुता: सुमात्याद्या भवितार:। Ta च
महापद्मस्यानु पृथिवीं went महापद्मस्तत्पुत्राश्च एकं
वर्षशतमवनीपतयो भविष्यन्ति। नवैव तान् नन्दान् कौटिल्यो
ब्राह्मण: समुद्धरिष्यति।। ६॥

The son of Mahdnanda will be born of a
woman of the Sidra or servile class; his name
will be Nanda, called Mahapadma, for he will
be exceedingly avaricious.'* Like another
Parasurama, he will be the annihilator of the
Ksatriya race; for after him the kings of the
earth will be Sidras. He will bring the whole
earth under one umbrella : he will have eight
sons, Sumdlya and others, who will reign after
Mahapadma; and he and his sons’ will govern
for a hundred years. The Brahmana Kautilya
will root out the nine Nandas.””

तेषामभावे मौर्याश्च पूथिवीं भोक्ष्यन्ति। कौटिल्य wa
चन्द्रगुप्तं राज्येऽभिषेक्ष्यति॥ ७॥

तस्यापि gt विन्दुसारो भविष्यति। तस्यापि
अशोकवर्द्धन:, AT: सुयशा:, ततो दशरथ:, तत: APA:
तस्याप्यनु बृहद्रथनामा भविता। एवं मौर्या दश भूपतयो
भोक्ष्यन्ति।। ८॥ ।

Upon the cessation of the race of Nanda,
the Mauryas will possess the earth, for Kaut
ilya will place Candragupta”' on the throne ;
his son will be Vindusdra; his son will be
Asokavarddhana;” his son will be Suyasas;”*
his son will be Dasgaratha; his son will be
Sangata; his son will Saligtika; his son will be
SomaSsarmman; his son will be Sasadharman;”>
and his successor will be Vrhadratha. These
