180

THE VISNU-PURANAM

may be the cause of confinement to existance;
for all this universe is wisdom, there is nothing
different from it; and consequently, Maitreya,
you are to conclude that both knowledge and
ignorance are comprised in wisdom.'*

एवमेतन्मया Gant भवतो मण्डलं भुव:।

पातालानि च सर्वाणि तथैव नरका द्विज॥४७॥

समुद्रा: पर्वताश्चैव द्वीपवर्षाणि निम्नगा:।

सङ्खेषात् सर्वमाख्यातं किं ya: श्रोतुमिच्छसि।। ४८॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे षष्ठोऽध्याय:।

I have thus described to you the orb of the
earth; the regions below its surface, or Patalas;
and the Narakas, or hells; and have briefly
cnumerated its oceans, mountains, continents,

regions and rivers: what else do you wish to
heat?

NOTES

1. The Bhagavata places the Narakas above the
waters. The commentator on our text endeavours to
reconcile the difference, by explaining the text to
imply a dark cavity in which the waters are
received, not the original abysses where they were
collected at first, and above which Tartarus lies:
ब्रह्माण्डगत गर्भोदकादूर्द्धमेव।

2. Some of these names are the same that are
given by Manu; b. IV. V. 88-90. Kullika Bhtta
refers to the Markandeya P. for a description of the
twenty-one divisions of hell; but the account there
given is not more ample than that of ur text. The
Bhagavata enumerates twenty-eight, but many of
the names differ from the above. In the last instance
the term Avichi is either inaccurately repeated, or
the adjuctive Apara (अवीचिस्तथापर:) is intended to
distinguish it from the previous Avichi. In Many,
MahAvichi occurs.

3. The Padma P. (Kriya Yoga Sara) and the Siva
Dharma, which appears to be a section of the
Skanda Purana, contain a number of interesting
circumstances previous to the infliction of
punishment. It apears also from them that Yama
fulfils the office of judge of the dead, as well as
sovereign of the damend; all that die appearing
before him, and being confronted with Chitragupra,
the recorder, by whom their actions actions have

been registered. The virtuous are thence conveyed
to Svarga, or Elysium, whilst the wicked are driven
to the different regions of Naraka, or Tartarus.

4. Who teaches the Veda for hire. This notion
still prevails, and renders the few Pandits who are
acquainted with the Vedas very unwilling to teach
them for a gratuity.

5. Tereby, observes the commentator, defrauding
or disappointing children.

6. Rangopajivina (रङ्गोपजीविन:) :the commentator
explain it wrestlers and boxers, but Ranga applies
to any stage or arena.

7. The term in the text is Mahishika, which
might mean a feeder of buffaloes; but the
commentator quotes a text from the Smrti,
authorizing the sanse above followed.

8. This is the interpretation of Parvakari; it is
also read Parvagami, he who cohabits with his wife
on prohibited days.

9. An account of Naraka is found in only a few
of the Puranas, and in less detail than in the text.
The Bhagavata and Vayu have similar descriptions
of them. The Markandeya enters into detail in some
of the instances only. A short account is found in
the Siva, Garuda, and Brahma Vaivartta Purana and
in the Kasi Khanda of the Skanda Purana. The
fullest descriptions, however, are those mentioned
in a previous note as being in the Siva Dharma of
the Skanda, and Kriya Yoga Sara of the Padma;
works of a somewhat equivocal character, and
belonging rather to Tantra than Puranik literature.

10. The commentator observes that the sight of
heavenly bliss is given to the damend in order to
exacerbate their torments; whilst the inflications of
hell are exhibited to the gods to teach them
disregard of even heavenly enjoyments, as they are
but of temporary durations.

11. That is, when punishment or reward in hell
or heaven, proportioned to the sin or virtue of the
individual, has been received, he must be born
again as a stone or plant, and gradually mgrate
through the several inferior conditions, until he is
once more born a man; his future state is then in his
own power.

12. Manu is here especially intended, as the
commentator observes.

13. Tis remembrance (GC) of Visnu is the
frequent reiteration of any or all of his names:
hence the lower orders of Hindus procure a starling
