150

THE VISNU-PURANAM

कृतोत्साह: क्रौञ्चशैलवरं win चित्रपुष्पनिकुंजस्य seer च
गिरेस्तटे। देवारिस्कन्दन: स्कन्दो aa शक्तिविमुक्त्वान्॥ The
legend here alluded to if told at length in the
Vamana Purina. Mahishasura, flying from the
battle, in which Tdraka had been slain by
Kartikeya, took refuge in a cave in the Krautica
mountain. A dispute arising between K4rtikeya and
Indra, as to their respective prowess, they
determined to decide the question by
circumbulating the mountain; the palm to be given
to him who should first go round it. Disagreeing
about the result, they appealed to the mountain,
who untruly decided in favour of Indra Kartikeya,
to punish his injustice, hurled his lance at the
mountain Kraufica. and pierced at once it and the
demon Mahisa. एवं ब्रुवन्तं स: (कार्तिकेये:)
क्रोधात्प्रस्फुरिताधर:। विभेद शबक्त्या समं तथा।
Another division of Kraufica is ascribed to
Parasurama. Megha Dita, v. 59. Kraufica is also
sometimes considered to be the narne of an Asura.
killed by Kartikeya; but this is pcrhaps some
misapprehension of the Pauranik legend by the
grammarians, springing out of the synonyms of
Kartikeya, Krauficfri. Krauficadarana. &c.,
implying the foe or destroyer of Kraujica. occurring
in the Amara and other Koshas.

11. The Bhagavata is more circumstantial. The
river flowed over the great toe of Visnu's left foot,
which had previously, as he lifted it up, made a
fissure in the shell of the mundane egg, and thus
gave entrance to the heavenly stream. The Vayu
merely brings it from the lunar orb and takes no
notice of Visnu's interposition. In a different
passage it describes the detention of Ganga amidst
the tresses of Siva, in order to correct her
arrogance, until the divinity was moved by the
penance and prayers of king Bhagiratha to set her
free. The Mahabharata represents Siva's bearing the
river for a hundred years on his head, merely to
prevent its falling too suddenly on the mountains.

12. Although the Vayu has this account, it
subsequently inserts another, which is that also of
the Matsya and Padma. In this the Ganga, after
escaping from Siva. is Raid to have formed seven
Streams; the Nalini, Hladini and Pavani going to the
east; the Caksu, Sita, and Sindhu to the wet and the
Bhagirathi the south. The Mahabharata calls them
Vasvaukasara, Nalini Pavani. Ganga, Sita, Sindhu
and Jambunadi. The more usual legend, however, is

the first, and it offers some trace of actual
geogcaphy. Faber, indeed, thinks that Meru, with
the surrounding Varga of Ilavrta, and its four rivers,
is a representation of the garden of Eden. (Pagan
Idolatry, I. 315.). However this may be, it seems
not unlikely to have originated in some imperfect
account of four great rivers flowing from the
Himalaya, and the high lands north of that range,
towards the cardinal points; the Bhadra, to the
north, representing the Oby of Siberia; and the
Sata, the river of China, or Hoangho. The
Alakananda is well known as a main branch of the
Gafigd, near its source; and the Caksus is very
possibly, as Wilford supposed, the Oxus. (As. Res.
VIII. 309.). The printed copy of the Bhagavata, and
the MS. Padma, read Banksu; but the former is the
more usual reading. It is said, in the Vayu, of
Ketumala, through which this river runs, that it is
peopled by various races of barbarians : केतुमाल
।

13. The text applies the latter name so variously
as to cause confusion: it is given to one of the four
buttresses of Meru, that on the south; to one of the
filament mountains, on the west; to a range of
boundary mountains, on the south; and to the Varsa
of Ketumala: here another mountain range is
intended, or a chain running north and south upon
the east of Ilavrta, connecting the Nila and Nisadha
ranges. Accordingly the Vayu states it to be 34000
Yojanas in extent; that is the diameter of Meru
16000, and the breadth of Ilavrta on each side of it,
or together 18000. A similar range, that of
Malyavan, bound-Ilavrta on the vest. It was
probably to avoid the confusion arising from
similarity of nomenclature, that the author of the
Bhagavata substituted different names for
Gandhamadana in the other instances. calling the
buttress, as we have seen, Merumandara; the
southern forest, Sarvatobhadra; and the filament
mountain. Hansa; restricting the term
GandhamAadana to the eastern range a correction, it
may be remarked, corroborative of a subsequent
date.

14. These eight mountains are smilarly
enumerated the in Bhagavata and Vayu. but no
mention is made in them of any seas
(अर्णवान्तर्व्यवस्थितौ), and it is clear that the eastern and
western oceans cannot be intended, as the
mountains Malyavat and Gandhamddana intervene.
