THE VISNU-PURANAM

546
याम्यकिङ्करपाशादिग्रहणं दण्डताडनम्।
यमस्य ॥४४॥

Wee नरके याश्च यातना द्विज! दु:सहा:।।४५॥

क्रकचै: पीडयमानानामूषायाञ्चापि धम्यताम्।

Rot: कृत्यमानानां भूमौ चापि निखन्यताम्।॥४६॥

शूलेष्वारोप्यमाणानां व्याघ्रवक्त्रे प्रवेश्यताम्।

गृध्र: सम्भक्ष्यमाणानां द्वीपिभिश्चोपभुज्यताम्।४७॥

उच्चान्निपात्यमानानां क्षिप्यतां क्षेपयन्त्रके:॥। ४ ८॥

नरके यानि दु:खानि पापहेतूद्भवानि वै।

ग्राप्यन्ते नारकैर्विप्र! तेषां संख्या न विद्यते ॥४९॥

Men are bound, when they die, by the
servants of the king of Tartarus with cords,
and beaten with sticks, and have then to
encounter the fierce aspect of Yama, and the
horrors of their terrible route. In the different
hells there are various intolerable tortures with
burning sand, fire, machines, and weapons;
some are served with saws, some roasted in
forges, some arc chopped with axes, some
buried in the ground, some are mounted on
stakes, some cast to wild beasts to be
devoured, some are gnawed by vultures, some
torn by tigers, some are boiled in oil, some
rolled in caustic slime, some are precipitated
from great heights, some tossed upwards by
engines. The number of punishments inflicted
in hell, which are the consequences of sin, is
infinite”.

न केवलं द्विजश्रेष्ठ नरके दु:खपद्धति:।

स्वर्गेऽपि पातभीतस्य क्षयिष्णोर्नास्ति निर्वृति:।५०॥

पुनश्च गर्भे भवति जायते च पुन: पुन:।

गर्भे विलीयते भूयो जायमानोऽस्तमेति an ५ १॥

म्रियते जातमात्रश्च बालभावेऽथ यौवने।

मध्यमं वा वय: प्राप्य वार्द्धके वा TAT मृति।॥ VW

But not in hell alone do the souls of the
deceased undergo pain: there is no cessation

even in heaven; for its temporary inhabitant is
ever tormented with the prospect of

descending again to earth. Again is he liable to
conception and to birth; he is merged again
into the embryo, and repairs to it when about
to be born; then he dies, as soon as born, or in
infancy, or in youth, or in manhood, or in old
age. Death, sooner or later, is inevitable.

यावज्रीवति तावच्च दुखैर्नानाविधै: प्लुत:।
तन्तुकारणपक्ष्मौघैरास्ते कार्पासबीजवत्॥ ५ ३॥
द्रव्यनाशे तथोत्पत्तौ पालने च तथा FOIA

भवन्त्यनेकदु:खानि तथैवेष्टविपत्तिषु॥ ५.४॥
ae यत् प्रीतिकरं पुंसां वस्तु Aya! जायते।

तदेव Sages बीजत्वमुपगच्छति॥ ५५॥

As long as he lives he is immersed in
manifold afflictions, like the seed of the cotton
amidst the down that is to be spun into thread.
In acquiring, losing, and preserving wealth
there are many griefs; and so there are in the
misfortunes of our friends. Whatever is
produced that is cost acceptable to man, that,
Maitreya, becomes a sced whence springs the
tree of sorrow.

क्रियते न तथा भूरि सुखं पुंसा यथाऽसुखम्।। ५६॥
इति संसारढु:खार्कतापतापितचेतसाम्।
विभुक्तिपादपच्छायामृते कुत्र सुखं FATT on
तदस्य त्रिविधस्यापि दु:खजातस्य षण्डितै:।
गर्भजन्मजराद्येषु स्थानेषु प्रभविष्यत:॥५८॥
निरस्यातिशयाह्लादसुखभावैकलक्षणा।

भैषस्यं भगवत्प्राप्तिरेकान्तात्यन्तिकी WAT ५९॥

Wife, children, servants, house, lands,
riches, contribute much more to the misery
than to the happiness of mankind. Where
could man, scorched by the fires of the sun of
this world, look for felicity, were it not for the
shade afforded by the tree of emancipation?
Attainment of the divine being is considered
by the wise as the remedy of the threefold
class of ills that beset the different stages of
life, conception, birth, and decay, as
characterized by that only happiness which
effacts all other kinds of felicity, however
abundant, and as being absolute and final’.
