370

THE VISNU-PURANAM

पुण्यफलोशऽथ watt राघवरूपिणा सो
नामाभवत्।। १४॥

शिशुपालत्वे च भगवतो भूभारावतारणायावतीर्णांशस्य
पुण्डरोकायनाखास्य उपरि द्वेषानुबन्धमतितरां चकार।

च निधनमुपनीतस्तत्रैव परमात्मभूते

फ्नसस्तदेकाप्रतया ALT सायुज्यमवाप।। १५॥

भगवान् fe प्रसन्नो यथाभिलषितं ददाति, अप्रसन्नोऽपि
निघ्नन् दिव्यमनुपमं स्थानं प्रयच्छति।। १६॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे agaist चतुर्द्दश: अध्याय:।

Pandu had another wife, named Madri who
had by the twin sons of Aditya, Nasatya and
Dasra, two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva.'®

Srutadeva was married to the Karusa prince
Vrddhasarman and bore him the fierce Asura
Dantavaktra. Dhrstaketu, Raji of Kaikeya,”
married Srutakirtti and had by her Santarddana
and four other sons, known as the five
Kaikeyas. Jayasena, king of Avanti, married
Rajadhidevi and had Vinda and Anuvinda.
Srutasravas was wedded to Damaghosa, «aja
of Cedi and bore him Sigupala.”” This prince
was in a former existence the unrighteous but
valiant monarch of the Daityas,
Hiranyakasipu, who was killed by the divine
guardian of creation (in the man-lion Avatara).
He was next the ten-headed sovereign Ravana,
whose unequalled prowess, strength and
power were overcome by the lord of the three
worlds, Rama. Having been killed by the deity
in the form of Raghava, he had long enjoyed
the reward of his virtues in exemption from an
embodied state, but had now received birth
once more as Sigupala, the son of Damaghosa,
king of Cedi. In this character he renewed,
with greater inveteracy than ever, his hostile
hatred towards the god surnamed Pundarikaks
a, a portion of the supreme being, who had
descended to lighten the burdens of the earth;
and was in consequence slain by him : but
from the circumstance of his thoughts being
constantly engrossed by the supreme being,

Sigupdla was united with him after death; for
the lord give to those to whom he is
favourable whatever they desire and he
bestows a heavenly and exalted even upon
those whom he slays in his displeasure.
NOTES

1. Bhiti ; Vayu. Kuni
Matsya.

2. The Agni makes these all brother's sons of
Satyaka and adds another, Rsabha, the father of
Svaphalka.

3. The authorities are not agreed here.
Svaphalka, according to the Agni, as just remarked,
comes from Simi, the son of Anamitra. The
Bhagavata, instead of Prsni, has Vrsni, son of
Anamitra; ihe Brahma and Hari Varhsa have Vrsni;
and the Agni, Prsni, son of Yudhajit. The Matsya
also makes Yudhajit the ancestor of Akrira,
through Rsabha and Jayanta. Yudhajit in the
Brahma, is the son of Krostri.

4. The different authorities vary in the reading of
these names, though they generally concur in the
number.

5. The Matsya and Padma call them sons of
Akrira, but no doubt incorrectly.

6. Sami : Vayu. Sasi : Matsya. Sini ; Agni. This
last makes them the sons of Babhru and calls the
first Sundara.

7. Vrsni ; Bhagavata, Vayu, Matsya, Dhrsta ;
Agni. Dhrsnu : Brahma, Hari Varnsa.

8. The Bhagavata puts Viloman first. The Linga
makes it an epithet of Kapotaroman, saying he was
Vilomaja, ‘irregularly begotten.' In place of
Viloman we have Raivata, Vayu; Taittiri, Matsya;
Tittiri, Agni.

9. Nava : Agni. Bala : Linga. Nala :
Tamas : Karma. Anu : Bhagavata.

10. The Matsya, Vayu and Agni agree with our
text. The Linga, Padma and Kirma read
Anakadundubhi as a synonym of Bala. The Brahma
and Hari Varnsa have no such name, but here insert
Punarvasu, son of Taittiri. The Bhagavata has a
different series or Anu, Andhaka, Dundubhi, Arijit,
Punarvasu, Ahuka.

Il. This Bhajamana is the son of Andhaka,
according to all the best authorities; so the Padma
calls this branch the Andhakas. The Agni makes
him the son of Babhru.

: Bhagavata. Dyumni ;

Matsya.
