BOOK Ill, CHAP. 16

285

like salt nor anything that is not commendable;
nor is water fit to be offered at a Sraddha that
has been brought by night or has been
abandoned or is to little as not to satisfy a cow
or smells badly or is covered with froth.

क्षीरमेकशफानां यदौष्ट्रमाविकमेव च।

मार्गञ्च माहिषञ्चैव वर्जयेच्छाद्धकर्मणि॥ ११॥
षण्ढापविद्धचाण्डालपाषण्डोन्मत्तरोगिभि:।
कृकवाकु-श्व-नग्नैश्च वानर-ग्रामशूकरै:॥ १२॥
उदक्यासूत्तकाशौचिमृतहारैश्च वीक्षिते।

श्राद्धे सुरा न पितरो भुञ्जते पुरुषर्षभ:॥ १३॥
तस्मात् परिश्रिते कुर्याच्छाद्धं श्रद्धासमन्वित:।
seals तिलविक्षेपादू यातुधानान् निवारयेत्।। १४॥
न पूति नैवोपपन्नं केशकीटादिभिर्नृप।

न चैवाभिषवैर्मिश्रमन्नं पर्युषितं तथा।। १५॥
यदाह्रारास्तु ते जातास्तदाहारत्वमेति ATI १६॥

The milk of animals with undivided hoofs,
of a camcl, a ewe, a deer or a buffalo, is unfit
for ancestral oblations. If an obsequial rite is
looked at by a eunuch, a man ejected from
society, an outcast, a heretic, a drunken man or
one diseased, by a cock, a naked ascetic,’ a
monkey, a. village hag, by a woman in her
courses or pregnant, by an unclean person or
by a carrier of corpses, neither gods nor
progenitors will partake of the food. The
ceremony should therefore be performed in a
spot carefully enclosed. Let the performer cast
sesamum on the ground and drive away
malignant spirits. Let him not give food that is
fetid or vitiated by hairs or insects or mixed
with acid gruel or stale. Whatever suitable
food is presented with pure faith and with the
enunciation of name and race, to ancestors, at
an obsequial oblation, becomes food to them
(or gives them nourishment).

ईक्ष्वाकोर्मनुपुत्रस्य कलापोपवने पुरा।। १७॥
अपि नस्ते भविष्यति कुले सन्मार्गगामिन:।
शयामुपेत्य ये पिण्डान् दास्यन्त्यस्माकमादरात्।। १८॥

अपि न: स्वकुले Ware यो नो दद्यात् त्रयोदशीम्।
पायसं wath वर्षासु च मघासु A ee!
गोरीं वाप्युद्वहेत् कन्यां नीलं वा वृषमुत्सृजेत्।
यजेत् arate विधिवद्दक्षिणावता।। २ 011

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे षोडशोऽध्याय:॥ १६॥

In former times, O king of the earth! this
song of the Pitrs was heard by Iksvaku, the son
of Manu, in the groves of Kalapa (on the skirts
of the Himalaya mountains) : 'Those of our
descendants shall follow a righteous path who
shall reverently present us with cakes at Gaya.
May he be born in our race who shall give us,
on the thirteenth of Bhadrapada and Magha,
milk, honey and clarified butter; or when he
marries a maiden or liberates a black bull‘ or
performs any domestic ceremony agreeable to
rule, accompanied by donations to the
Brahmanas!"°

KE
NOTES

1. See Manu, III. 266. The articles are much the
same; the periods of satisfaction somewhat vary.

2. The expression Gavya (714) implies all that is
derived from a cow, but in the text it is associated
with 'flesh;' and as the commentator observes, some
consider the flesh of the cow to be here intended :
मांसमध्यपाठान्मांसमेवेत्यन्ये। but this, he adds, relates to
other ages. In the Kali or present age it implies milk
and preparations of milk. The sacrifice of a cow or
calf formed part of the ancient Sraddha. It then
became typical or a bull was turned loose, instead
of being slaughtered; and this is still practised on
some occasions. In Manu, the term Gavya is
coupled with others, which limit its application :
संवत्सरं तु गव्येन पयसा पायसेन च। 'A wholc year with the
milk of cows and food made of that inilk.' II]. 271.

3. Nagna is literally 'naked’, but, as explained in
the following chapter, means a Jain mendicant. No
such person is included by Manu (III. 239) amongst
those who defile a Sriddha by looking upon it. The
Vayu contains the same prohibition : नग्नादयो न
Wag: |

4. Nila vrsa; but this animal is not altogether or
always black. In the Brahma Purina, as quoted in
the Nirnaya Sindhu, it is said to be of a red colour,
with light face and tail and white hoofs and horns;
