514

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and the distinguished Yadu, in whose praises
songs were sung, and who was preminent
amidst graceful and  sportive women,
resembled Kuvera, god of riches, in his palace.
Whilst thus engaged, the monkey Dvivida
came there, and stealing the ploughshare and
the club of Baladeva, grinned at and mocked
him, and laughed at the women, and threw
over and broke the cups filled with wine.
Balarama, becoming angry at this, threatened
the monkey; but the latter disregarded his
menaces, and made a chattering noise: on
which Bala, starting up, seized his club in
wrath; and the monkey laid hold of a large
rock, which be hurled at the hero. Bala casting
his club at it, as it neared him, broke it into a
thousand fragments, which, together with the
club, fell upon the ground. Beholding the club
prostrate, the monkey sprang over it, and
struck the Yadava violently on the breast with
his paws, Bala replied with a blow of his fist
upon the forehead of Dvivida, which felled
him, vomiting blood. and lifeless, to the earth.
The crest of the mountain on which he fell was
splintered into a hundred pieces by the weight
of his body, as if the thunderer had shivered it
with his thunderbolt.

yorgf ततो देवा रामस्यौषरि धिक्षिपु:।

प्रशशंसुस्तथाभ्येत्य साध्वेतत्ते महत् कृतम्।। २१॥

ane दृष्टकपिना दैत्यपक्षोपकारिण।

जगन्निराकृतं ate! दिष्ट्यासौ क्षयमागत:।। २२॥

इत्युक्त्वा दिवमाजम्मुर्देवा हृष्टा: सगुह्यका:।। २३॥

The gods threw down a shower of flowers
upon Rama, and approached him, and praised
him for the glorious feat he had performed.
"Well has the world been freed,” said they, “
by your prowess. O hero, of this vile ape, who
was the ally of the enemy of the gods.” Then
they and their attendant spirits returned well
pleased to heaven.

पराशर उवाच
एवंबिधान्यनेकानि बलदेवस्य धीमत:।
कर्माण्यपरिमेयाणि शेषस्य धरणीभृत:।। २४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे षट्त्रिंश: अध्याय:॥

Many such inimitable deeds were wrought
by the illustrious Baladeva, the impersonation
of Sega, the supporter of the earth.!
NOTES

1 This exploit of Balarama is also similarly, but.
more vulgarly, related in the Bhagavata. It is simply
laid in the Hari Vamésa. and erroneously. that
Menda and Dvivida were conquered by Krsna.

१६१९ %
