58

The cause of the cause; the cause of the
cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to
him I bow. To him who is the enjoyer and
thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be
created; who is the agent and the cffect; to that
supreme being I bow.

Gro Gert [

अव्यक्तपविकारं यत् तद्विष्णो: परपं षदम्॥५०॥
म Wet न च सूक्ष्मं wa विशेषणगोचरम्।
तत्पदं परमं विष्णो: MOTT: सदामलम्।।५१॥

The infinite nature of Visnu is pure,
intelligent, perpetual, unborn, undecayable,
inexhaustible, inscrutable, immutable; it is
neither gross nor subtile, nor capable of being
defined: to that ever holy nature of Visnu I
bow.

ज्ञि विश्रशकतिस्थि स्थिता।
परं ब्रह्मस्वरूपं यत् प्रणमामस्तमव्ययम्।।५२॥
aa देवा न मुनयो न चाहं न च METI
जानन्ति परमेशस्य तद्विष्णो: परमं पदम्।।५३॥
ae योगिन: सदोद्युक्ता: पुण्यपापक्षयेऽक्षयम्।
avatar wore चिन्त्यं तद्विष्णो परमं पदम्।। ५४॥

शक्तयो यस्य देवस्य ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवादिका:।
भवन्त्यभूतपूर्वस्य तद्विष्णो: परमं पदम्।।५५॥

सर्वेश सर्वभ्रतात्मन् wa सर्वाश्रयाच्युत।
wale विष्णो भक्तानां व्रज नो दृष्टिगोचरम्॥ ५६॥

To him whose faculty to create the universe
abides in but a part of but the ten-millionth
part of him; to him who is one with the
inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the
glorious nature of the supreme Visnu, which
nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor Sankara
apprehend; that nature which the Yogis, after
incessant effort, effacing both moral merit and
demerit, behold to be contemplated in the
mystical monosyllable Om: the supreme glory
of Visnu, whois the first of all; of whom, one
only god, the triple energy is the same with
Brahma, Visnu, and Siva: oh lord of all, great
soul of all, asylum of all, undecayable, have
pity upon your servants; oh Visnu, he manifest
to us.”

THE VISNU-PURANAM

इत्युदीरितमाकर्ण्य ब्रह्मणस्तिदशास्तत:।

प्रणम्योचु: प्रसीदेति व्रज नो दृष्टिगोचरम्।। ५७॥।

यन्नायं भगवान् ब्रह्मा जानाति परमं पदम्।

तन्नाता: स्म जगद्धाम Ta Va गताच्युत।। ५८॥

Pardsara continued—The gods, having heard
this prayer uttered by Brahma, bowed down,
and cried, “Be favourable to us; be present to
our sight: we bow down to that glorious nature
which the mighty Brahma does not know; that
which is your nature, oh imperishable, in
whom the universe abides.”

इत्यन्ते वचसस्तेषां देवानां ब्रह्मणस्तथा।

ऊचुर्देवर्षय: सर्वै: बृहस्पतिपुरोगमा:। ५९॥

SEN यज्ञपुमानिड्यो य: सर्वेषाञ्च पूर्वज:।

तं नता: स्म जगत्स्रष्टु: स्रष्टारमविशेषणम्।।६०॥

भगवन् TTA STENT

प्रसीद प्रणतानां त्वं सर्वेषां देहि दर्शनम्॥६ १

Then the gods having ended, Brhaspati and
the divine Rsis thus prayed: “We bow down to
the being entitled to adoration; who is the first
object of sacrifice; who was before the first of
things; the creator of the creator of the world;
the undefinable: oh lord of all that has been or
is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have
pity upon your worshippers; appear to them.
prostrate before you.

एष ब्रह्मा तथैवायं सह रुद्रैस्त्रिलोचन:।

सर्वादित्यै: समं ger पावकोऽयं सहाग्निभि:।। ६ २॥
अश्विनौ वसवश्चेमे ad चैते मरुद्गणा:।

साध्या विश्चे तथा देवा देवेन्द्रश्चायमीश्वर:।। ६ ३॥
प्रणामप्रवणा नाथ दैत्यसैन्यपराजिता:।

शरणं त्वामनुप्राप्ता: समंस्ता देवतागणा:।। ६४॥

Here is Brahma; here is Trilocana (the
three-eyed Siva), with the Rudras; Pusan (the
sun), with the Adityas; and Fire. with all the
mighty luminaries: here are the sons of Asvini
(the two ASvini Kumaras). the Vasus and all
the winds, the Sadhyds, the Visvedevas, and

Indra the king of the gods: all of whom bow
lowly before you : all the tribes of the
