BOOK V, CHAP. 19

465

भुवं विष्टभ्य हस्ताभ्यां पस्पर्श शिरसा महीम्।। २०॥

प्रसादपरमौ नाथौ wa देहमुपागतौ।

Akrira having thus spoken, left them, and
entered the city; whilst Rama and Krsna
continued to walk along the royal road.
Regarded with pleasure by men and women,
they went along sportivery, looking like two
young clephants. As they roamed about, they
saw a washerman colouring clothes, and with
smiling countenances they went and threw
down some of his fine linen. The washerman
was the servaut of Kansa, made insolent by his
master's favour; and he provoked the two lads
with loud and scurrilous abuse, until Krsna
struck him down, with his head to the ground,
and killed him. Then taking the clothes, they
went their way, clad in yellow and blue
raiment, until they came to a flower-seller's
shop. The flower-seller looked at them with
astonishment, and wondered who they could
be, or whence they could have come. Seeing
two youths so lovely, dressed in yellow and
blue garments, he imagined them to be
divinities descended upon earth. Being
addressed by them with mouths budding like
lotuses, and asked for some flowers, he placed
his hands upon the ground, and touched it with
his head, saying, “My lords have shown me
great kindness in coming to my _ house,
fortunate that I am; I will pay them homage.”

धन्योऽहमर्च्चयिष्यामीत्याह तौ माल्यजीवक:॥ २१॥
तत: प्रहृष्टवदनस्तयो: पुष्पाणि कामत:।
चारूण्येतान्यथैतानि प्रददौ स विलोभयन्।। २२॥
पुन: पुन: प्रणम्यासौ मालाकारो नरोत्तमौ।

ददौ पुष्पाणि चारूणि गन्धवन्त्यमलानि च।। २३॥
भालाकाराय कृष्णोऽपि प्रसन्न: प्रददौ वरान्।
श्रींस्त्वां मत्संश्रया ag! न कदाचित: प्रहास्यति।। २४॥
वलहानिर्न ते dha! धनहानिस्थथैव च।
यावद्दिनानि तावच्च न नशिष्यति सन्तति:॥२५॥
भुक्त्वा च विपुलान् भोगांस्तमन्ते मत्प्रसादजम्।
ममानुस्मरणं प्राप्य दिव्यं लोकमवाप्स्यसि।। २६॥

aay मनश्च ते ug! सर्वकालं भविष्यति।

युष्मत्सन्ततिजातानां दीर्घमायुर्भविष्यति।। २७॥

नोपसर्गादिकं ate युष्मत्सन्ततिसम्भव:।

सम्प्राप्स्यति महाभाग: यावत् सूर्यो धरिष्यति।। २८॥

Having thus spoken, the flower-seller, with
a smiling aspect, gave them whatever choice-
flowers they selected, to conciliate their
favour. Repeatedly prostracing himself before
them, he presented them with flowers
beautiful, fragrant, and fresh. Krsna then,
being much pleased with him, gave him this
blessing; “Fortune, good friend, who depends
upon me, shall never forsake you: never shall
you suffer loss of vigour, or loss of wealth: as
long as time shall last your descendants shall
not fail. Having long tasted various delights on
earth, you shall finally obtain, by calling me to
recollection, a heavenly region, the
consequence of my favour. Your heart shall
ever be intent on righteousness, and fulness of
days shall be the portion of your posterity.
Your descendants shall not be subject to
natural infirmities, as long as the sun shall
endure.” ,

पराशरं उवाच

इत्युक्त्वा तद्गृहात् कृष्णो बलदेवसहांयवान्।

निर्जगाम मुनिश्रेष्ठ! मालाकारेण पूजित:।॥ २९॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे एकोनविंश: अध्याय:।

Having thus spoken, Krsna and Rama,
worshipped by the flower-seller, went forth
from his dwelling.
NOTES

1 These incidents are told, with some
unimportant differences, in the other accounts of
Krsna's youth.

४९ ४९ ४९
