BOOK III, CHAP. 9

253

his station;” satisfying the manes with funeral
cakes; the gods with oblations; guests with
hospitality; the sages with holy study; the
progenitors of mankind with progeny, the
spirits with the residue of oblations; and all the
world with words of truth A householder
secures heaven by the faithful discharge of
these obligations. There are those who subsist
upon alms and lead an erratic life of self-
denial, at the end of the term during which
they have kept house. They wander over the
world to see the earth and perform their
ablutions, with rites enjoined by the Vedas at
sacred shrines : houseless and without food
and resting for the night at the dwelling at
which they arrive in the evening. The house-
holder is to them a constant refuge and parent :
it is his duty to give them a welcome and to
address them with kindness; and to provide
them, whenever they come to his house, with a
bed, a seat and food. A guest disappointed by a
householder, who turns away from his door,
transfers to the latter all his own misdceds and
bears away his religious merit.’

अवज्ञानमहङ्कारो दम्भश्चैव TS सत:।

परितापोपघातौ च पारुष्यञ्च न शस्यते।। १६॥
यस्य सम्यक् करोत्येवं you: परमं विधिम्।
सर्वबन्धविनिर्मुक्तो लोकानाप्नोत्यनुत्तमान्॥ १७॥

In the house of a good man, contumely,
arrogance, hypocrisy, repining, contradiction
and violence are annihilated and the
householder who fully pertorms this his chief
duty of hospitality is released from very kind
of bondage and obtains the highest of stations
after death.

वय:परिणतौ ws! कृतकृत्यो गृहाश्रमी।
पुत्रेषु भार्यां निक्षप्य वनं गच्छेत् Wes aT १८॥
पर्ण-मूल-फलाहार: केशश्मश्रुजटाधर:।
भूमिशायी भवेत्तत्र मुनि: सर्वातिथिर्नृप।। १९॥
चर्मकाशकुशै: कुर्यात् परिधानोत्तरीयके।

Tee त्रिसवनं स्नानं शस्तमस्य नरेश्वर।। २०॥
देवताभ्यर्चनं होम: सर्वाभ्यागतपूजनम्।

भिक्षा बलिप्रदानञ्च शस्तमस्य नरेश्वर।। २१॥

तपश्च तस्य राजेन्द्र! शीतोष्णादिसहिष्णुता।। २२॥

यस्त्वेतां निहितश्चर्यां वानप्रस्थश्चरेन्मुनि:।

स दहत्यग्निवद्दोषान् जयेल्लोकांश्च शाश्वतान्।। २३॥

When the householder, after performing
the acts incumbent on his condition, arrives at
the decline of life, let him consign his wife to
the care of his sons and go himself to the
forests.° Let him there subsist upon leaves,
roots and fruit and suffer his hair and beard to
grow and braid the former upon his brows; and
sleep upon the ground : his dress must be
made of skin or of Kasa or KuSa grasses; and
he must bathe thrice a day; and he must offer
oblations to the gods to fire and treat all that
come to him with hospitality : he must beg
alms and present food to all creatures; he must
anoint himself with such unguents as the
woods afford; and in his devotional exercises
he must be endurant of heat and cold. The sage
who diligently follows these rules and leads
the life of the hermit (or Vanaprastha),
consumes, like fire, all imperfections and
conquers for himself the mansions of eternity.

चतुर्थश्चाश्रमो भिक्षो: प्रोच्यते यो मनीषिभि:।
तस्य स्वरूपं गदतो मम श्रोतुं नृपार्हसि।। २४॥
युत्रद्रव्यकलत्रेषु त्यक्तस्नेहो नराधिप।
चतुर्थमाश्रमं स्थानं गच्छेन्निर्धूतमत्सर:। २५॥
त्रैवर्गिकांस्त्यजेत् सर्वानारम्भानवनीपते।
मित्रादिषु समो मैत्र: समस्तेष्वेव GTN २६॥
जरायुजाण्डजादीनां वाङ्-मन:-कायकर्मभि:।
युक्त: Hala न He सर्वसङ्गांश्च वर्जयेत्।। २७॥

"The fourth order of men is called that of
the mendicant; the circumstances of which it is
fit, oh king, that you should hear from me. Let
the unimpassioned man, relinquishing all
affection for wife, children and possessions,
enter the fourth order.° Let him forego the
three objects of human existence (pleasure,

wealth and virtue), whether secular or
religious and indifferent to friends, be the
