120

THE VISNU-PURANAM

कर्त्तव्या पण्डितैर्जात्वा सर्वभूतमयं हरिम्।। ९॥

"Whatever power I possess, father, is
neither the result of magic ritcs, nor is it
inseparable from my nature; it is no more than
that which is possessed by all in whose hearts
Acyuta abides. He who meditates not of wrong
to others, but considers them as himself, is
free from the effects of sin, inasmuch the
cause does not exist; but he who inflicts pain
upon others, in act, thought, or speech, sows
the seed of future birth, and the fruit that
awaits him after birth is pain. I wish no evil to
any, and do and speak no offence; for I behold
KeSava in all beings, as in my own soul.
Whence should corporeal or-mental suffering
or pain, inflicted by elements or the gods,
affect me, whose heart is thoroughly purified
by him? Love, then, for all creatures will be
assiduously cherished by all those who are
wise in the knowledge that Hari is all things."

पराशर उवाच
इतिश्रुत्वासदैत्येन्द्रद्ब प्रासादशिखरे स्थित:।
क्रोधान्धकारितमुख: We दैतेयकिङ्करान्।। १०॥
दुरात्मा क्षिप्यतामस्मात् प्रासादाच्छतयोजनात्।
गिरिपृष्ठे पतत्वस्मिन् शिलाभिन्नाङ्गसंहति:। ११॥
ततस्त चिक्षिपु: ad बालं दैतेयदानवा:।
पपात सोऽप्यध: क्षिप्तो हृदयेनोद्वहन् हरिम्॥ १२॥
पतमानं जगद्धात्री जगद्धातरि केशवे।

भक्तियुक्तं दधारैनमुपसङ्गम्य मेदिनी।। १३॥

When he had thus spoken, the Daitya
monarch, his face darkened with fury,
commanded his attendants to cast his son from
the summit of the palace where he was sitting,
and which was many Yajanas in height, down
upon the tops of the mountains, where his
body should be dashed to pieces against the
rocks. Accordingly the Daityas hurled the boy
down, and he tell cherishing Hari in his heart,
and Earth, the nurse of all creatures, received
him gently on her lap, thus entirely devoted to
KeSava, the protector of the world.

ततो त्रिलोक्य तं स्वस्थमविशीर्णास्थिपञ्जरम्।

हिरण्यकशिपु: we erat मायिनां ATTN १४॥

Beholding him uninjured by the fall and
sound in every bone, Hiranyakasipu addressed
himself to Samvara, the mightiest of
enchanters, and said to him,

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
मायां वेत्ति भवांस्तस्मान्माययैनं निषूदय।। १५॥

"This perverse boy is not to be destroyed
by us: do you, who are potent in the arts of
delusion, contrive some device for his
destruction."

शम्बर उवाच
सूदयाम्येष दैत्येन्द्र पश्य मायाबलं मम।
सहस्रमात्रं मायानां यस्य कोटिशतं FAM १६॥
Samvara replied. “I will destroy him: you
shall behold, king of the Daityas, the power of

delusion, the thousand and the myriad artifices
that it can employ."

षपराशर उवाच
तत: स ससृजे मायां प्रह्लादे शम्बरोऽसुर:।
विनाशमिच्छन् दुर्बद्धि: सर्वत्र समदर्शिनि।। १७॥
सप्राहितमतिंर्भूत्वग्शम्बरेंऽपिविमत्सर;।
मैत्रेय! सोऽपि प्रह्लाद: सस्मार मधुसूदनम्।। १८॥
ततो भगवता तस्य रक्षार्थं चक्रमुत्तमम्।
आजगाम समाज्ञप्तं ज्वालामालि सुदर्शनम्॥ १९॥
तेन मायासहस्रं तच्छम्बरस्याशुगामिना।
बालस्य TAM देहमैकैकश्येन सूदितम्।। २०॥
शीघ्रमेष ममादेशाद् दुरात्मा नीयतां क्षयम्।। २ HI
तथेत्युक्त्वा तु सोऽप्येनं विवेश पवनो लघु।
शीतोऽतिरूक्ष: शोषाय तद्देहस्यातिदु:सह:॥ २२॥
तेनाविष्टमथात्मानं स बुद्धा दैत्यबालक:।
हृदयेन महात्मानं SENT धरणीधरम्।। २३॥
हृदयस्थस्ततस्तस्य तं वायुमतिभीषणम्।
पपौ जनार्द्दन: क्रुद्ध: स ययौ पवन: क्षयम्।। २४॥
