BOOK I, CHAP. 8

49

वरप्रदो वरोविष्णुर्वधू: पद्मवनालया। २९॥

O illustrious Brahman, Laksmi is Gauri;
and Kesava is the deity of ocean (Varuna). Sri
is the host of heaven (Devasena); the deity of
war. her lord. is Hari. The wielder of the mace
is resistance; the power to oppose is Sri Laks
mi is the Kastha and the Kala: Hari the Nimes
a and the Muhiirtta. Laksmi is the light: and
Hari, who is all, and lord of all, the lamp. She,
the mother of the world, is the creeping vine;
and Visnu the tree round which she clings. She
is the night; the god who is armed with the
mace and discus is the day. He, the bestower
of blessings. is the bridegroom; the lotus-
throned goddess is the bride.

नदस्वरूपी भवाञ्छीर्नदीरूपसंस्थिति:।
ध्वजश्च पुण्डरीकाक्ष: पताका कमलालया॥३०॥
TOM लक्ष्मीर्जगत्स्वामी CNY नारायण: पर:।
रति-रागौ च धर्मज्ञ लक्ष्मीर्गोविन्द va a3 eu
किञ्चातिब्हुनोक्तेन संक्षेपेणेदमुच्यते।
देवतिर्य्यङ्मनुष्यादौ पुंन्नाम्नि भगवान् हरि:।
स्त्रीनाम्नि लक्ष्मीर्मैत्रेय नानयोर्विद्यते परम्॥३ २॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे अष्टमोऽध्याय:॥
The god is one with all male— the goddess

one with all female, rivers. The lotus-eyed
deity is the standard; the goddess seated on a

lotus the banner. Laksmi is  cupidity;
Narayana, the master of the world, is
covetousness, Oh you who know what

rigteousners is, Govinda is love; and Laksmi,
his gentle spouse, is pleasure. But why thus
diffusely cnumerate their presence?—it is
enough to-say, in a word. that of gods,
animals, and mcn. Hari is all that is called
male; Laksmi is all that is termed female:

there is nothing else than they.
1 Ha न

NOTES

1. The creation of Rudra has been already
adverted to. and that seems to be the primitive form
of the legend. We have here another account,
grounded apparently upon Saiva or Yoga
mysticism.

2. The appearance of Rudra as a Kumara, 'a
boy,’ is described as of repeated occurrence in the
Linga and Vayu Puranas, as already noticed (Ch. V.
Note 12); and these Kumaras are of different
complexions in different Kalpas. In the Vaisnava
Puranas, however, we have only one original form,
to which the name of Nilalohita, the blue and red or
purple complexioned is assigned. In the Karma this
youth comes from Brahma's mouth: in the Vayu,
from his forehead,

3. This is the Pauranic etymology:teme वनाच्चैव
रुद्र:। or rud, ‘to weep.' and dru. ‘to run.’ The
grammarians derive the name from rud. 'to weep’,
with ra affix.

4, The Vayu details the application of each name
severally These eight Rudras are therefore but one,
under as many appellations, and in as many types.
The Padma. Markandeya, Karma, Linga.. and Vayu
agree with our text in the nomenclature of the
Rudras. and their types, their wives, and progeny.
The types are those which are enumerated in the
Nandi, or opening benedictory verse, of Sakuntala;
and the passage of the Visnu Purana was found by
Chezy on the envelope of his copy. He has justly
corrected Jones's version of the term ®t ‘the
sacrifice is performed with solemnity;’ as the word
means. ‘Brahmana officiant दीक्षितो ब्राह्मण:। ‘the
Brahman who is qualified by intiation (Diksa) to
conduct the rite.’ These are considered as the
bodies, or visible forms, of those modifications of
Rudra which are variously named, and which,
being praised in them, severally abstain from
harming them: तेषु Waa वन्द्य: स्यात्। रुद्रस्तान्न हिनस्ति वै।
fa श्रुति:। Vayu Purina The Bhagavata. III. 12. has a
different scheme, as usual; but it confounds the
notion of the eleven Rudras, to whom the text
subsequently adverts. with that of the cight here
specified. These eleven it terms Manyu, Manu,
Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva. Rtadhvaja. Ugraretas.
Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva, and Dhrtavrata: their
wives are. Dhi. Dhrti. Rasaloma, Niyut. Sarpi, 114,
Ambika, Iravati, Svadha. Diksa, Rudrani: and their
places are the heart, senses, breath, ether, air, fire.
water, earth, sun. moon, and tapas. or ascetic
devotion. The same allegory or mystification
characterises both accounts.

5. See the story of Daksa’s sacrifice at the end of
the chapter.
