BOOK VI, CHAP. 3

537

The nature of this dissolution is very fearful:
hear me describe it, as well as that which takes
place at the elemental dissolution, which I will
also relate to you.

चतुर्युगसहस्रान्ते क्षीणप्राये महीतले।
अनावृष्टिरतीवोग्रा जायते शतवार्षिकी॥ १४॥
तततो यान्यल्पसाराणि तानि सत्त्वान्यशेषत:।

क्षयं यान्ति मुनिश्रेष्ठ! पार्थिवान्यत्र पीडनात्।। १५॥
तत: स भगवान् विष्णु रुद्ररूपधरोऽव्यय:।
क्षयाय यतते कर्ततुमात्मस्या: सकला: प्रजा:।। १६॥
ततत्त: स भगवान् विष्णुर्भानो: wey रश्मिषु।
स्थित: पिबत्यशेषाणि जलानि मुनिसत्तम।। १७॥
पीत्वाम्भांसि समस्तानि प्राणिभूमिगतानि वै।
शोषं नयति मैत्रेय! समस्तं पृथिवीतलम्॥ १८॥
सरित्-समुद्र-शैलेषु शैल प्रस्रवणेषु च।

पातालेषु च यत्तोयं तत् wa नयति क्षयम्॥१९॥
ततंस्तस्यानुभावेन तोयाहारोपबृंहिता:।

त एव रश्मय: सप्त जायन्ते सप्त भास्करा:॥ Voll
अधश्चोर्द्धञ्च ते दीप्तास्तत: wa दिवाकरा:।
दहन्त्यशेषं त्रैलोक्यं सपातालतलं द्विज।। २१॥
दह्यमानन्तु तैदीप्तैस्त्रैलोक्यं fist! भास्करै:।
साद्बिनद्यर्णवाभोगं नि:स्नेहमति जायते।। २ २॥
भवत्येका च ager कूर्म्मपृष्ठोपमाकृति:॥ २३॥

At the end of a thousand periods of four
ages the earth is for the most part exhausted. A
total dearth then ensues, which lasts a hundred
years; and, in consequence of the failure of
food, all beings become languid and
exanimate, and at last entirely perish. The
eternal Visnu then assumes the character of
Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to reunite
all his creatures with himself. He enters into
the seven rays of the sun,” drinks up all the
waters of the globe, and causes all moisture
whatever, in living bodies or in the soil, to
evaporate; thus drying up the whole earth. The
seas, the rivers, the mountain torrents, and
springs, are all exhalled; and so are all the
waters of Patala, the regions below the earth.

Thus fed, through his intervention, with
abundant moisture, the seven solar rays dilate
to seven suns®, whose radiance glows above,
below and on every side, and sets the three
worlds and Patala on fire. The three worlds,
consumed by these suns, become rugged and
deformed throughout the whole extent of their
mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare
of verdure, and destitute of moisture, alone
remains, resembling in appearance the bank of
a tortoise.

तत: कालाग्निरुद्रोऽसौ भूत्वा सर्वहरो हरि:।

शेषनि:श्वाससम्भूत: पातालानि बभस्त्यध:।। २४॥

पातालानि समस्तानि स दग्ध्वा ज्वलनो महान्।

भूमिमभ्येत्य सकलं AUT वसुधातलम्॥ २५॥

भुवर्लोकं तत wd स्वरलेकञ्च सुदारुण:।

ज्वालामालामहावर्त्तस्तत्रैव परिवर्त्तते।। २६॥
रोषमिवाभाति त्रैलोक्यमखिलं तदा।

ज्वालावर्त्तपरीवारमुपक्षीणचराचरम्॥ २७॥

ततस्तापपरीतास्तु लोकद्वयनिवासिन:।
कृताधिकारा गच्छन्ति महर्लोकं महामुने।। २८॥

Teele महातापतप्ता लोकास्तत: परम्।

गच्छन्ति जनलोकं ते दशाव्रृत्या परैषिण:।॥ २९॥

The destroyer of all things, Hari, in the
form of Rudra, who is the flame of time,
becomes the scorching breath of the serpent
Sega, and thereby reduces Patala to ashes. The
great fire, when it has burnt all the divisions of
Patala, proceeds to the earth, and consumes it
also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then
spreads to the region of the atmosphere, and
the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin.
The three spheres show like a frying-pan
amidst the surrounding flames, that prey upon
all moveable or stationary things. The
inhabitants of the two upper spheres, having
discharged their functions, and being annoyed
by the heat, remove to the sphere above, or
Maharioka. When that becomes heated, its
tenants, who after the full period of their stay
are desirous of ascending to higher regions,
depart for the Janaloka’.
