446

THE VISNU-PURANAM

त्वया त्रातभिरत्यर्थं युष्मत्सत्कारकारणात्॥ ११॥
स त्वां कृष्णाभिषेक्ष्यामि wat वाक्यप्रचोदित:।
उपेन्द्रत्वे गवामिन्द्रो गोविन्दस्त्वं भविष्यसि।। १२॥
अथोपबाह्यादादाय घण्टामैरावताद् गजात्।
अभिषेकं तया चक्रे पवित्रजपूर्णया ॥ १३॥
क्रियमाणेऽभिषेके तु गाव: कृष्णस्य तत्क्षणात्।

प्रस्रवोद्भूतदुग्धारद्रा सद्यश्चक्रुर्वसन्धराम्।। १४॥

The object of the gods is now, methinks,
accomplished, since with thy single hand you
hast raised aloft this chief of mountains. I have
now come by dcsire of the cattle', grateful for
their preservation, in order to install you as
Upendra; and, as the Indra of the cows, you
shall be called Govinda.” Having thus said,
Mahendra took a ewer from his elephant
Airavata, and with the holy water it contained
performed the regal ceremony of aspersion.
The cattle, as the rite was celebrating, deluged
the earth with their milk.

अभिषिच्य Tat वाक्याद् देवेन्द्रो वै जनार्द्दनम्।
प्रीत्या सप्रश्रयं कृष्णं पुनराह शचीपति:।॥ १५॥
TAT se वाक्यं तथान्यदपि मे शृणु।

BS व्रवीमि WMT! भारावतरणेच्छया।। १६॥
ममांश: पुरुषव्याघ्र पृथायां पृथिवीतले।
अव्रतीर्णोऽर्जुनो नाम स रक्ष्यो भवता सदा।। १७॥
भारावतारणे Ue स ते ae! करिष्यति।

स रक्षणीयो भवता यथात्मा मधूसूदन।। १८॥

When Indra had, by direction of the kine,
inaugurated Krsna, the husband of Saci said to
bim affectionately, “I have thus performed
what the cows enjoined me. Now, illustrious
being, hear what farther I propose, with a view
to facilitate your task. A portion of me has
been born as Arjuna, the son of Prtha: let him
ever be defended by you, and he will assist
you in bearing thy burden. He is to be
cherished by you, Madhusiidana, like another
self.”

श्रीभगवानुवाच

तमहं पालयिष्यामि यावदस्मि महीतले॥ १९॥

यावन्महीतले शक्र! स्थास्याम्यहमरिन्दम।

न तावदर्जुनं aire देवेन्द्र! युधि जेष्यति।। २०॥
SA नाम महाबाहुदैत्योऽरिष्टस्तथापर:।

केशी कुवलयापीडो नरकाद्यास्तथापरे।। 2 2
हतेष्वेतेषु देवेन्द्र! भविष्यति महाहव:।

aa विद्धि सहस्राक्ष भारावतरणं कृतम्।। २ २॥

स त्वं गच्छ न पुत्रार्थे सन्तापं area

नार्जुनस्य fig: कश्चिन्ममाग्रे प्रभविष्यति।। २३॥
अर्जुनार्थे त्वहं सर्वान् युधिष्ठिरपुरोगमान्।

Fad भारते Ja कुन्त्या दास्याम्यविक्षतान् ।। २४॥

To this Krsna replied, “I know thy son,
who has been born in the race of Bharata, and
I will befriend him as long as I continue upon
earth. As long as | am present, invincible
Sakra, no one shall be able to subdue Arjuna
in fight. When the great demon Kansa has
been slain, and Arista, Kesin, Kuvalayapida,
Naraka, and other fierce Daityas, shall have
been put to death, there will take place a great
war, in which the burden of the earth will be
removed. Now therefore depart, and be not
anxious on account of thy son : for no foe shall
triumph over Arjuna whilst I am present. For
his sake I will restore to Kunti all her son, with
Yudhisthira at their head, unharmed, when he
Bharata war is at an end.”

इत्युक्त: सम्परिष्वज्य देवराजो जनार्द्दनम्।
आरुह्यैरावतं नागं पुनरेव दिवं ययौ। २५॥
कृष्णोऽपि सहितो गोभिर्गोपालैश्च पुनर्व्रजम्।
आजगामाथ गोपीनां दृष्टिपूतेन वर्त्मना॥ २६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे द्वादश: अध्याय:॥

Upon Krsna's ceasing to speak, he and
Indra mutually embraced; and the latter,
mounting his elephant Airdvata, returned to
heaven. Krsna, with the cattle and the
herdsmen, went his way to Vraja, where the
wives of the Gopas watched for his approach.
NOTES

1. Gobhiacha chodita (गोभिश्च चोदित:); that is,
‘delegated,’ says the commentator, ‘by the cow of
plenty. Kamadhenu, and other celestial kine,
