470

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Caniira round a hundred times, until his breath
was expended in the air, Krsna dashed him on
the ground with such violence as to smash his
body into a hundred fragments, and strew the
earth with a hundred pools of gory mire.
Whilst this took place, the mighty Baladeva
was engaged in the same manner with the
demon bruiser Mustika. Striking him on the
head with his fists, and on the breast with his
knees, he stretched him on the ground, and
pummelled him there till he was dead.

कृष्णस्तोमलकं भूयो VENT महाबलम्।

वाममुष्टिप्रहारेण पातयामास भूतले।। ६६॥

चाणूरे Fred मल्ले मुष्टिके विनिपातिते।

नीते क्षयं तोमलके We मल्ला: प्रयुटुबु:।।६७॥

ववल्गतुस्तदा रङ्गे कृष्णसङ्कर्षणावुभौ।

समानवयसो गोपान् बलादाकृष्य Bhat ६ ८॥

कंसोऽपि कोपरक्ताक्ष: प्राहोच्चैर्वयापृतान् नरान्।

गोपावतौ समाजोघान्निष्काश्येतां बलादित:।। ६९॥

नन्दोपि गृह्यताँ पापो निगडैरायसैरिह।

अवृद्धार्हेण दण्डेन वसुदेवोऽपि वध्यताम्॥७०॥

वल्गन्ति mot: कृष्णेन ये चेमे सहिता: पुर:।

गावो ह्नियन्तामेतेषां यच्चास्ति वसु किञ्चन॥७१।।

Again, Krsna encountered the royal bruiser
Tomalaka, and felled him to the earth with a
blow to his left hand. When the other athlete
saw Chanira, Mustika, and Tomalaka killed,
they fied from the field; and Krsna and
Sankarsana danced victorious on the arena,
dragging along with them by force the
cowherds of their own age. Kansa, his eyes
reddening with wrath, called aloud to the
surrounding people, “Drive those two cow”
boys out of the assembly: seize the villain
Nanda, and secure him with chains of iron: put
Vasudeva to death with tortures intolerable to
his years: and lay hands upon the cattle, and
whatever else belongs to those cowherds who
are the associates of Krsna.”

उत्पत्यारुह्य तं मञ्चं कंसं जग्राह AAT Vl

केशेष्वाकृष्य विगलत्किरीटमवनीतले।

कंस स पातयामास तस्योपरि पपात च।।७३॥
नि:शेष-जगदाधार-गुरुणा पततोपरि।

कृष्णेन त्याजित: प्राणानुग्रसेनात्मजो नृप:।।७४॥
मृतस्य केशेषु तदा गृहीत्वा मधुसूदन:।

चकर्ष देहं कंसस्य रङ्गमध्ये महाबल:॥७५॥
गौरवेणातिमहता परिखा तेन कृष्यता।

BAT कंसस्य देहेन वेगेनेव ATTA: 11196 II
कंसे गृहीते कृष्णेन तद्भ्राताभ्यागतो रुषा।
सुमाली बलभद्रेण लीलयैव निपातित:॥७७॥
ततो हाहाकृतं सर्वमासीत् तद्रङ्गमण्डलम्।
अवज्ञया हतं SAT कृष्णेन मंथुरेश्वरम्।। 9611
कृष्णोऽपि वसुदेवस्य पादौ जग्राह सत्वर:।
देवक्याश्च महाबाहुर्ललभद्रसहायवान्।। ७९॥
उत्थाप्य वसुदेवस्तं देवकी च जनार्द्दनम्।
स्मृतजन्मोक्तवचनौ aaa wordt frat ८ of

Upon hearing these orders, the destroyer of
Madhu laughed at Kansa, and, springing up to
the place where he was seated, laid hold of
him by the hair of his head, and struck his tiara
to the ground: then casting him down upon the
earth, Govinda threw himself upon him.
Crushed by the weight of the upholder of the
universe, the son of Ugrasena, Karsa the king,
gave up the ghost, Krsna then dragged the
dead body, by the hair of the head, into the
centre of the arena, and a deep furrow' was
made by the vast and heavy carcass of Kansa,
when it was dragged along, the ground by Krs
na, as if a torrent of water had ran through it’
Seeing Kansa thus treated, his brother SumAlin
came to his succour; but he was encountered,
and easily killed, by Balabhadra. Then arose a
general cry of grief from the surrounding
circle, as they beheld the king of Mathura thus
slain, and treated with such contumely, by
Krsna. Krsna, accompanied by Balabhadra,
embraced the feet to Vasudeva and of Devaki;
but Vasudeva raised him up; and he and
Devaki recalling to recollection what he had
said to them at his birth, they bowed to
