286

CHAPTER 17
सप्तदशोऽध्याय:

(नग्नलक्षणम्, भीष्म-वशिष्ठसंवाद:, विष्णुस्तुति:
। मायामोहोत्पत्तिश्च)

WHT उवाच
इत्याहं भगवानौर्वे सगराय भहात्मने।

सदाचारान् पुरा सम्यङ् मैत्रेय! परिपृच्छते।। gi

`भयाप्येतदशेषेण कथितं भवते द्विज!

समुल्लङ्घ्य सदाचारं कश्चिन्नाप्नोति शोभनम्।। २॥

-Pardgara said— Thus, in former days, spoke
the holy Aurva to the illustrious monarch
Sagara, when he inquired concerning the
usages proper to be practised by mankind; and
thus I have explained to you the whole of
those observances against which no one ought
to transgress.

मैत्रेय sara

षण्ढापविद्धप्रमुखा विदिता भगवन्!। मया।
उदक्याद्याश्च ये सर्वे नग्नमिच्छामि वेदितुम्॥३॥
को नग्न: fe समाचारो नग्नसंज्ञां नरो लभेत्।
नग्नस्वरूपमिच्छामि यथावदू गदितं त्वया।
(ag धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठ! न ह्यस्त्यविदितं तव)॥४॥

Maitreya said-You have told me, venerable
sir, that an ancestral rite is not to be looked
upon by certain persons, amongst whom you

THE VISNU-PURANAM

mentioned such as were apostates. I am
desirous to learn whom you intended by that
appellation; what practices bestow such a title
upon a man; and what is the character of the
individual to whom you alluded.

पराशर उवाच
WASH यो मोहात् स AM: पातकी SAT UG HI
rat समस्तवर्णानां द्विज! संवरणं यत:।
भग्नो भवत्युञ्जितायामतस्तस्यां न संशय:॥६॥
इदञ्च श्रूयतामन्यद् भीष्माय सुमहात्मने।
कथयामास धर्मज्ञो वसिष्ठोऽस्मत्पितामह:॥७॥

PardSara replied— The Rk, Yajur and Sama
Vedas constitute the triple covering of the
several castes and the sinner who throws this
off is said to be naked (or apostate). The three
Vedas are the raiment of all the orders of men
and when that is discarded they are left bare.
On this subject hear what I heard my
grandfather, the pious Vasistha, relate to the
magnanimous Bhisma :

भयापि तस्य गदत: श्रुतमेतन्महात्मन:।

भग्नसम्बन्धि मैत्रेय! यत् पृष्ठोऽहमिह war cu

देवासुरमभूद् युद्धं दिव्यमब्दं पुरा द्विज!

तस्मिन् पराजिता देवा दैत्यैर्हादपुरोगमै:।। ९॥

क्षीरोदस्योत्तरं कूलं गत्वातप्यन्त वै तप:।

विष्णोराराधनार्थाय जुगुश्चेमं स्तवं तदा॥ १०॥

आराधनाय लोकानां विष्णोरीशस्य यां freq

वक्ष्यामो भगवानाद्यस्तया विष्णु: प्रसीदतु॥ ११॥

यतो भूतान्यशेषाणि प्रसूतानि महात्मन:।

यस्मिंश्च लयमेष्यन्ति wet स्तोतुमिहेश्वर:।। १२॥

तथाप्यरातिविध्वंसध्वस्तवीर्या भवार्थिन:।

wi स्तोष्यामस्तवोक्तीनां wart Faq Ara १३॥

There was formerly a battle between the

gods and demons, for the period of a divine
year, in which the gods were defeated by the
demons under the command of Hrada.” The
discomfited deities fled to the northern shore
of the milky ocean, where engaging in
religious penance they thus prayed to Visnu :
