BOOK I, CHAP. 13

213

your retinue; yet it is unture that all these are
said to be yours.

वृक्षाद् दारु ततश्चेयं शिबिका त्वदधिष्ठिता।

fa वृक्षसंज्ञा aren: स्याद्दारुसंज्ञाथवा नृप।। ९३॥
वृक्षारूढो महाराजो नायं वदति ते जन:।

न च दारुणि सर्वस्त्वां ब्रवीति शिविकागतम्।। ९४॥
शिबिका दारुसङ्घातो रचनास्थितिसंस्थित:।
अन्विष्यतां नृपश्रेष्ठ! wae शिबिका त्वया।। ९५॥
एवं छत्रशलाकानां पृथग्भागे विमृश्यताम्।

क्व यातं छत्रमित्येष न्यायस्त्वयि तथा मयि।॥ ९६॥

The palankin on which you sit, is made of
timber derived from a tree. What then? is it
denominated either timber or a tree? People do
not say that the king is perched upon a tree,
nor that he is seated upon a piece of wood,
when you have mounted your palankin. The
vehicle is assemblage of pieces of timber,
artificially joined together: judge, prince, for
yourself in what the palankin differs really
from the wood. Again; contemplate the sticks
of the umbrella, in their separate state. Where

then is the umbrella? Apply this reasoning to
you and to mc!’.

पुमान् स्त्री गौरजो anit कुञ्जरो विहगस्तरु:।

देहेषु लोकसंज्ञेयं विज्ञेया कर्म्महेतुषु॥ ९७॥

पुमान्न देवो न नरो न पशुर्न च पादप:।

शरीराकृतिभेदास्तु भूपैते कर्मयोनय:।॥ ९८॥

वस्तु राजेति यल्लोके यच्च राजभटात्मकम्।

तथान्यच्च Fed तन्न सत्सङ्कल्पनामयम्।। ९९॥

यत्तु कालान्तरेणापि नान्यां संज्ञामुपैति वै।

परिणामादिसम्भूतां तद्वस्तु नृप! तच्च किम्॥ १० oll

त्वं राजा सर्वलोकस्य fog: gat fiat रिपु:।

पत्न्या: पति: पिता सूनो किं त्वां भूप! वदाम्यहम्।। १०१

A man, a woman, a cow, a goat, a horse, an

elephant, a bird, a tree, are names assigned to
various bodies, which are the consequences of
acts. Man’ is neither a god, nor a man, nor a
brute, nor a trec; these are merc varieties of

shape, the effects of acts. The thing which in
the world is called a king, the servant of a

king, or by any other appellation, is not a
reality; it is the creature of our imaginations:
for what is there is the world, that is subject to
vicissitude, that does not in the course of time
go by different names, You are called the
monarch of the world; the son of your father;
the enemy of your foes; the husband of your
wife; the father of your children. What shall I
dcnominate you? How are you situated?

त्वं किमेतच्छिर: किं नु त्रीवा तव तथोदरम्।

किमु पादादिकं त्वं वा तवैतत् किं महीपते।। १० २॥

समस्तावयवेभ्यस्त्वं पृथग् ye! व्यवस्थित:।

कोऽहमित्यत्र निपुणो भूत्वा चिन्तय पाथिव।। १० ३॥

एवं व्यवस्थिते तत्त्वे मयाहमिति भाषितुम्।

पृथक करणनिष्पाद्यं शक्यते नृपते। कथम्॥ १० ४॥
Bia श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:।

Are you the head or the belly? or arc they
your? Are you the feet? or do they belong to
you? You are, oh king, distinct in your nature
from all your members! Now then, rightly
understanding the question, think who I am;
and how it is possible for me, after the truth is
ascertained (of the identity of all), to recognise

any distinction, or to speak of my own
individuality by the expression I.”

NOTES
i. One copy addresses Parasara, Bhagavan
sarvabhutesa, ‘Sacred sovereign, lord of all

creatures;’ rather an unusual title for a sage, even
though an inspired one. The other two copiss begin,
Samyagikhyatam. ‘All has been thoroughly
explained.’

2. See Bk. II. Ch. I.

3. The Mahanadi is properly a river in Orissa,
but the name is applicable to any great stream, and
its connexion with Salagrama Tirtha makes it
probable that it is intended for the Gandaki or
Gandaka, in which the Salagram or Ammonite is
most abundantly found. It may be here noticed that
Salagrama is named amongst the Tirthas in the
Mahabharata : see Bk. II. Ch. I. n.6.

4. The applicability of this simile is not
explained by the commentator : it refers possibly to
