BOOK HI, CHAP. 3

233

In every Dvapara (or third) age, Visnu, in
the person of Vyasa, in order to promote the
good of mankind, divides the Veda, which is
properly but one, into many portions:
observing the limited perseverance, energy
and application of mortals, he makes the
Vedas four-fold, to adapt it to their capacities;
and the bodily form which he assumes, in
order to effect that classification, is known by
the name of Vedavydsa. Of the different
Vyasas in the present Manvantara' and the
branches which they have taught, you shall
have an account.

अष्टाविंशतिकृत्वो & वेदा व्यस्ता महिर्षिभि:।
वैवस्वतेऽन्तरे ह्यस्मिन् द्वापरेषु पुन: पुन:।।९॥
वेदव्यासा व्यतीता ये अष्टाविंशति सत्तम!
चतुरद्धा यै: कृतो वेदो द्वापरेषु YA: FA १०॥
द्वितीये द्वापरे da वेदव्यास: प्रजापति:।। ११॥
तृतीये चोशना व्यासश्चतुर्थे च बृहस्पति:।

सविता पञ्चमे व्यासो मृत्यु: षष्ठे स्मृत: प्रभु:॥१२॥
सप्तमे च तथैवेन्द्रो वसिष्ठश्चाष्टमे स्मृत:।
सारस्वतश्च नवमे त्रिधामा दशमे स्मृत:।। १३॥
एकादशे तु त्रिवृषा भरद्वाजस्तत: परम्।
`एकादशे चान्तरीक्षो वप्री चापि चतुर्दशे।। १४॥
FATE: पञ्चदशे षोडशे तु धनञ्जय:।

क्रतुञ्जय: सप्तदशे ऋणज्योऽष्टादशे स्मृत:।। १५॥
ततो व्यासो भरद्वाजो भरद्वाजात् तु गौतम:।
गौतमादुत्तमो व्यासो हर्यात्मा योऽभिघीयते।। १६॥
अथ हर्यात्मनो वेण: स्मृतो वाजश्रवान्वय:।
सोमशुष्मायनस्तस्मात् तृणबिन्दुरिति स्मृत:॥ १७॥
ऋक्षोऽभूद्धार्गवस्तस्माद् वाल्मीकिर्योऽभिधीयते।
तस्मादस्मात्पिता शक्तिर्व्यसस्तस्मादहं FA १८॥
जातूकर्णोऽभवन्मत्त: कृष्णद्वैपायनस्तत:।
अष्टाविंशतिरित्येते वेदव्यासा: पुरातना:॥१९॥
wat वेदश्चतुर्धा तु यै: कृतो द्वापरादिषु।

भविष्ये grat चापि द्रौणिर्व्यसो भविष्यति।
व्यतीते मम पुत्रेऽस्मिन् कृष्णद्वैपायने मुनौ।। २०॥

Twenty-eight times have the Vedas been
arranged by the great Rsis in the Vaivasvata
Manvantara in the Dvapara age and
consequently eight and twenty Vydsas have
passed away; by whom, in their respective
periods, the Veda has been divided into four.
In the first Dvapara age the distribution was
made by Svayarhbhu (Brahma) himself; in the
second, the arranger of the Veda (Vedavyasa)
was Prajapati (or Manu); in the third Usanas;
in the fourth, Brhaspati; in the fifth, Savitri; in
the sixth, Mrtyu (death or Yama); in the
seventh Indra; in the eighth, Vasistha; in the
ninth, Sdrasvata; in the tenth, Tridh4aman; in
the eleventh, Trivrsan; in the twelfth,
Bharadvaja, in the thirteenth, Antariksa; in the
fourteenth, Vapra; in the fifteenth,
Trayyaruna’; in the sixteenth, Dhanafijaya; in
the seventeenth, Kritafijaya; in the eighteenth,
Rina; in the nineteenth, Bharadvaja; in the
twentieth, Gautama; in the twenty-first,
Uttama, also called Haryatma; in the twenty-
second, Vena, who is likewise named
Rajasravas; in the twenty-third, Somasus
mapana, also Trinavindu; in the twenty-fourth,
Rksa, the descendant of Bhrgu, who is known
also by the name Valmiki; in the twenty-fifth,
my father Sakti was the Vyasa; I was the
Vyasa of the twenty-sixth Dvapara and was
succeeded by Jaratkaru; the Vy4sa of the
twenty-eighth, who followed him, was Krsna
Dvaipayana. These are the twenty-eight elder
Vyasas, by whom, in the preceding Dvapara
ages, the Veda has been divided into four. In
the next Dvapara, Drauni (the son of Drona)
will be the Vyasa, when my son, the Muni Krs
na Dvaipayana, who is the actual Vy4sa, shall
cease to be (in that character).°

ध्रुवमेकाक्षरं ब्रह्म ओमित्येवं व्यस्थितम्।

FEAT बृंहणत्वाच्च तद्ब्रह्मेत्यभिधीयते।। २ BU
प्रणवावस्थितं नित्यं भूर्भुव:स्वरितीर्य्यते।
ऋग्यजु:सामाथर्वाणं यत् तस्मै ब्रह्मणे नम:॥ VU
महत: परमं Yat तस्मै सुब्रह्मणे नम:।॥२३॥
