378

त्वञ्चास्य धाता गर्भस्य सत्यमाह PTET

The son of Puru was Janamejaya; his son
was Pracinvat; his son was Pravira; his son
was Manasyu; his son was Bhayada;' his son
was Sudyumna;” his son was Bahugava; his
son was Samyati;* his son was Ahamyati;° his
son was Raudraéva,° who had ten sons, Rteyu,”
Kakseyu, Sthandileyu, Ghrteyu, Jaleyn,
Sthaleyu, Santateyu, Dhaneyu, Vaneyu and
Vrateyu.® The son of Rteyu was Rantinara,’
whose sons were Tansu, Apratiratha and
Dhruva.'° The son of the second of these was
Kanva and his son was Medhatithi, from
whom the Kanvaydna Brahmanas'' descended.
Anila’ was the son of Tansu and he had four
sons of whom Dusyanta was the elder.'? The
son of Dusyanta was the emperor Bharata; a
verse explanatory of his name is chanted by
the gods; "The mother is only the receptacle; it
is the father by whom a son is begotten.
Cherish they son, Dusyanta; treat not
Sakuntala with disrespect. Sons, who are born
from the paternal loins, rescue their
progenitors from the infernal regions. You are
the parent of this boy; Sakuntala has spoken
truth." From the expression — 'cherish’,
Bharasva, the prince was called Bharata.'*

भरतस्य च यत्नीनां ये नव पुत्रा बभूवु: नैते ममानुरुपा:
Yat इत्यभिहितास्तन्मातरो जघ्नु: षरित्यागभयात्॥ ५॥

+ षठ्यते।। ६॥

We! भर द्वाजमिमं भर द्वाजं बृहस्पते।

यातौ यदुक्त्वा पितरौ भरद्वाजस्ततस्त्वयम्॥७॥इति।
wees aa वितथे पित्रजन्मनि मरुद्भिर्दत्त:) ततो
वितथसंज्ञामवाप।। ८॥

वितथस्य भवन्मन्यु: पुत्रोऽभूत्। बृहत्क्षत्र-महावीर्य-नर-
गर्गाद्या भवन्मन्यु-पुत्रा:। नरस्य सङ्कृति:) रुचिरथी-
द्विजातयो BAUS

THE VISNU-PURANAM

महावीर्य्यदुरुक्षयो नाम पुत्रोऽभूत्। तस्य त्रय्यारुण-
पुष्करिण्यौ कपिलश्च पुत्रत्रयमभूत्। तच्च त्रितयमपि wie
विप्रतामुपजगाम्। बृहत् क्षत्रस्य सुहोत्र:, सुहोत्राद् हस्ती, य
यत: काण्वायना द्विजा:॥१०॥

अजमीढस्यान्य: fiat बहदिषु: बृहदिषोबृहद्वसु:, ततश्च
geamt, wenn: ततोऽपि विश्वजितं, waar
पुत्रा:। रुचिराश्वत: पृथुसेन:, तस्मात् पार: पाराद् नीप:।
समर:॥११॥

Bharata had by different wives nine sons,
but they were put to death by their own
mothers, because Bharata remarked that they
bore no resemblance to him and the women
were afraid that he would therefore desert
them. The birth of his sons being thus
unavailing, Bharata sacrificed to the Maruts
and they gave him Bharadvaja, the son of
Brhaspati by Mamata the wife of Utathya,
expelled by the kick of Dirghatamas, his half
brother, before his time. This verse explains
the purport of his appellation; “ 'Silly woman,’
said Brhaspati, 'cherish this child of two
fathers' (bhara dv4-jam). 'No, Brhaspati,’
replied Mamata, do you take care of him.’ So
saying, they both abandoned him; but from
their expressions the boy was called
Bharadvaja." He was also termed Vitatha, in
allusion to the unprofitable (vitatha) birth of
the sons of Bharata.'> The son of Vitatha was
Bhavanmanyu;'® his sons were many and
amongst them the chief were Vrhatksatra,
Mahavirya, Nara and Garga.'” The son of Nara
was Sankrti; his sons were Ruciradhi and
Rantideva.'® The son of Garga was Sini;'? and
their descendants called Gargyas and Sainyas,
although Ksatriyas by birth, became
Brahmanas.” The son of Mahavirya was
Uruksaya,”) who had three sons, Trayyaruna,
Puskarin and Kapi;” the last of whom became
a Brahaman. The son of Vrhatksatra was
