168

THE VISNU-PURANAM

वर्षाचलेषु Tay सर्वेष्वेतेषु चानघा:।

वसन्ति देवगन्धर्वसहिता: सततं प्रजा:॥ ८।।

ay पुण्या जनपदाक्षिराच्च म्रियते जन:।

नाधयो व्याधयो वापि सर्वकालसुखं हि तत्।। ९॥
तेषां नद्यस्तु सप्तैव वर्षाणाञ्च समुद्रगा:।

नामतस्ता: प्रवक्ष्यामि श्रुता: पापं हरन्ति या:॥१०॥
अनुतप्ता शिखी चैव विपाशा त्रिदिवा क्रमु:।
अमृता सुकृता चैव सप्तैतास्तत्र निम्नगा:।। ११॥
एते शैलास्तथा नद्य: RAAT: कथितास्तव।
क्षुद्रशैलास्तथा नद्यस्तत्र सन्तिं ASAT १२॥

oat: पिबन्ति सदा gar नदीर्जनपदास्तु ते।
अपसर्पेणी न dat वै न चैवात्सर्पिणी fA १३॥

न त्वेवास्ति युगावस्था ag स्थानेषु सप्तसु।
त्रेतायुगसम: काल: सर्वदैव महामते।। १४॥
प्लक्षद्वीपादिषु ब्रह्मन्! शाकद्वींपान्तिकेषु वै।
पञ्चवर्षसहस्राणि जना जीवन्त्यनामया:।॥ १५॥
amt: wa त्वथैतेषु वर्णाश्रमविभागजा:।
amiga ax चत्वारस्तान् Frater वदामि an १६॥

Medhitithi, who was made sovereign of
Plaksa, had seven sons, Santabhaya, Sisira,
Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva, Ksemaka, and
Dhruva; and the Dvipa was divided amongst
them, and each division was named after the
prince to whom it was subject. The several
kingdoms were bounded by as many ranges of
mountains, named severally Gomeda, Candra,
Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumanas, and
Vaibharaja. In these mountains the sinless
inhabitants ever dwell along with celestial
spirits and gods: in them are many holy places;
and the people there live for a long period,
exempt from care and pain, and enjoying
uniterrupted felicity. There are also, in the
seven divisions of Plaksa, seven rivers,
flowing to the sea, whose names alone are
sufficient to take away sin: they are the
Anutapta, Sikhi, Vipas4,- Tridiva, Kramu,
Amrita and Sukrité. These are the chief rivers
and mountains of Plaksa-dvipa, which I have
enumerated to you; but there are thousands of
others of inferior magnitude. The people who

drink of the waters of those rivers are always
contented and hapy, and there is neither
decrease nor increase amongst them,’ neither
are the revolutions of the four ages known in
these Vargas: the character of the time is there
uniformly that of the Treta (or silver) age. In
the five Dvipas, worthy Brahmana, from Plaks
a‘ of Saka, the length of life is five thousand
years, and religious merit is divided amongst
the several castes and orders'of the people.

आर्यका: rage विविंशा भाविनश्च ये।
विप्र-क्षत्रिय-वैश्यास्ते शूद्राश्च मुनिसत्तम।। १७॥
जम्बूवृक्षप्रमाणस्तु तन्मध्ये सुमहांस्तरु:।
प्लक्षस्तन्नामसंज्ञोऽयं प्लक्षद्वीपो द्विजोत्तम।। १८॥
इज्यते तत्र भगवांस्तैर्वर्णैरार्यकादिभि:।

सोमरूपी जगत्स्नष्टा सर्व: सर्वेश्वरो हरि:॥ १९॥
प्लक्षद्वीपप्रमाणेन प्लक्षद्वीप: WATT: |
तथैवेक्षुरसोदेन परिवेशानुकारिणा॥ २०॥

इत्येवं तव मैत्रेय! प्लक्षद्वीप उदाहत:।

संक्षेपेण मया भूय: शाल्मलं मे निशामय। २१॥

The castes are called Aryaka, Kuru, Vivdsa
and Bhavi, corresponding severally with
Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sddra. In this
Dvipa is a large fig-tree (F. religiosa), of
similar size as the Jambu-tree of Jambu-
dvipa; and this Dvipa is called Plaksa, after the
name of the tree. Hari, who is all, and the
creator of all, is worshipped in this continent
in the form of Soma (the moon). Plaksa-dvipa
is sorrounded, as by a disc, by the sea of
molasses, of the same extent as the land. Such,
Maitreya, is a brief description of Palksa-
dvipa.

शाल्मलस्येश्वरो वीरो वपुष्मांस्तत्सुतान् शृणु।
aang नामसंज्ञानि we वर्षाणि तानि वै।। २२॥
श्वेतोऽथ हरितश्चैव जीमूतो रोहितस्तथा।

वैद्युतो मानसश्चैव सुप्रभश्च महामुने।। २३॥
`शाल्मलेन समुद्रोऽसौ द्वीपेनेक्षुरसोदक:।
विस्ताराद्दिगुणेनाथ सर्वत: daa: स्थित:।। २४॥
तत्रापि पर्वता: सप्त विज्ञेया रत्नयोनय:।
