210

THE VISNU-PURANAM

क्षत्तारं क्रूरकर्माणमच्छिनत् कण्ठमूलत:।
स्वपार्षदयुता देवी पपौ रुधिरमुल्वणम्॥५०॥
तत: सौवीरराजस्य प्रयातस्य महात्मन:।
विष्टिकर्ताथ मन्येत विष्टियोग्योऽयमित्यपि।। ५ ei

क्षत्ता सौवीरराजस्य विष्टियोरयममन्यत।। ५ २॥

This, the counsel of Hiranyagarbha,° did
the Brahmana call to mind, and hence assumed
the appearance of a crazy idiot in the eyes of
the world. His food was raw pulse, potherbs,
wild fruit, and grains of corn. Whatever came
in his way he ate, as part of a necessary, but
temporary infliction’. Upon his father’s death
he was set to work in the fields by the brothers
and his nephews, and fed by them with vile
food; and as he was firm and stout of make,
and a simpicton in outward act, he was the
slave of cvery one that chose to employ him,
receiving sustenance alone for his hire. The
head servant of the king of Sauvira, looking
upon him as an indolent, untaught Brahmana,
thought him a fit person to work without pay
(and took him into his master’s service to
assist in carrying the palankin).

स राजा शिविकारूढो गन्तुं qerafafian
बभूवेक्षुमतीतीरे कपिलर्षेर्वराश्रमम्॥ ५ 31)

ora: किमत्र संसारे दु:खप्राये नृणामिति।

wg तं मोक्षधर्मज्ञं कपिलाख्यं महामुनिम्।५४॥
sare शिविकां तस्य क्षत्तुर्वचनचोदित:।

नृणां विष्टिगृहीतानामन्येषां सोऽपि मध्यग:।। ५५1
गृहीतो विष्टिना विप्र: सर्वज्ञानैकभाजनम्।
जातिस्मरोऽसौ WITT क्षयकाम उवाह ताम्॥५६॥
waht जडगति: सोऽथ युगमात्रावलोकन:।

Hay मतिमतां श्रेष्ठस्तदन्ये त्वरितं ययु:॥५७॥
विलोक्य gata: सोऽथ विषमां शिविकागतिम्।
किमेतदित्याह समं गम्यतां शिबिकावहा:॥ ५ ८॥

Kapila, on the banks of the Iksumati river®, to
consult the sage, to whom the virtues leading
to liberation were known, what was most
desirable in a world abounding with care and
sorrow. Amongst those who by order of his
head servant had been compelled gratuitously
to carry the litter was the Brahmana, who had
been equally pressed into this duty, and who,
endowed with the holy universal knowledge,
and remembering his former existence, bore
the burden as the means of expiating the faults
for which he was desirous to atone. Fixing his
eyes upon the pole, he went tardily along,
whilst the other bearers moved with alacrity;
and the king, feeling the litter carried
unevenly, called out, “Ho bearers! what is
this? Keep equal pace together.”

पुनस्तथैव शिबिकां विलोक्य विषमां fe स:।
नृप: किमेतदित्याह भवद्भिर्गम्यतेऽन्यथा॥ ५९॥
भूपतेर्वदतस्तस्य श्रुत्वेत्यं बहुशो वच:।
शिबिकावाहका: प्रोचुरयं यातीत्यसत्वरम्॥६०॥

Still it proceeded unsteadily, and the Raja
again exclaimed, “What is this? how
irregularly are you going!” When this had
repeatedly occurred, the palankin-bearers at
last replied to the king, “It is this man, who
lags in his pace.”

राजोवाच

fe श्रान्तोऽयल्पमध्वानं त्वयोढा शिबिका मम।
किमायाससहो न त्वं पीवानसि निरीक्ष्यसे॥। ६ १॥

“How is this?” said the prince to the
Brahmana, “are you weary? You have carried
your burden but a little way; are you unable to
bear fatigue? and yet you look robust.”

Get sary

नाहं पीवान्न चैवोढा शिबिकां भवतो wari
न श्रान्तोऽस्मि न चायास: सोढव्योऽस्ति महीपते।। ६ २॥

The Brahmana answered and said, “It is not
I who am robust, nor is it by me that your

The king having ascended his litter, on one palankin is carried. I am not wearied, prince,
occasion, was proceeding to the hermitage of por am I incapable of fatigue.”
