BOOK V, CHAP. 29

भारावद्याणार्थय ममैव भगवानिमम्।

अंशेन लोकमायात: प्रसादसुमुख: प्रभो।। २५॥
त्वं कर्ता त्वं faaat च dent प्रभवोऽप्यय:।
जगतां त्वं जगद्रूप: स्तूयतेच्युत! किं Tan २६॥
व्यापी व्याप्य: क्रिया oat कार्य्यञ्च भगवान् यथा।
सर्वभूतात्मभूतस्य स्तूयते Ta fH AAT २७॥

परमात्मा च भूतात्मा महात्मा चाव्ययो भवान्।
यदा तदा स्तुतिर्नाथ! किमर्थं ते प्रवर्त्तते।। २८॥

wate सर्वभूतात्मन्! नरकेण fe यत् कृतम्।
तत् क्षम्यतामदोषाय त्वत्सुत: त्वन्निपातित:। २९॥

The Earth said “When, O lord, I was
upheld by you in the form of a boar, your
contact then engendered this my son. He
whom you gave me has now been killed by
you: take therefore these two earrings, and
cherish his progeny. You, lord, whose aspect
is ever gracious, has come to this sphere, in a
portion of yourself, to lighten my burden. You
are the eternal creator, preserver, and
descrover of the universe; the origin of all
worlds, and one with the universe: what praise
can be worthily offered to you? You are the
pervader, and that which is pervaded, the are,
the agent, and the effect; the universal spirit of
all beings; what praise can be worthily offered
to you? You are the abstract soul, the sentient
and the living soul of all beings, the
imperishable: but since it is not possible to
praise you worthily, then why should the
hopeless attempt proceed? Have compassion,
O universal soul, and forgive the sins which
Naraka has committed. Verily it is for the
sanctification of thy son that he has been killed
by you.”

पराशर उवाच
Taft चोक्त्वा धरणीं भगवान् भूतभावन:।
रत्नानि नरकावासञ्जग्राह मुनिसत्तम।। ३ ott

The lord, who is the substance of all
creatures, having replied to the earth, “Even
so”, proceeded to redeem the various gems
from the dwelling of Naraka.

493

कन्यापुरे स कन्यानां षोडशातुलविक्रम:।
शताधिकानि east सहस्राणि महामते।। ३ १॥
चतुर्दन्तान् गजाश्चोग्रयान् षट्सहस्रान् स दृष्टवान्।
काम्बोजानां तथाश्वानां नियुतान्ये विंशतिम्॥ ३ २॥
कन्यास्ताश्च तथानागंस्तानश्वान् द्वारकां पुरीम्।
प्रेषयामास गोविन्द: सद्यो नरककिङ्करै:।। ३ ३॥
ददृशे वारुणं छत्रं तथैव मणिपर्वतम्।
आरोपयामास हरिर्गरुडे पन्नगाशने।। ३४॥
आरुह्य त स्वयं कृष्ण: सत्यभामा-सहायवान्।
आदित्या: कुण्डले दातुं जगाम त्रिदिवालयम्॥ ३५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे एकोनत्रिंश: अध्याय:॥

In the apartments of the women he found
sixteen thousand and one hundred damsels’ :
he also beheld in the palace six thousand large
elephants, each having four tusks; twency-one
lakhs of horses of Kamboja and _ other
excellent breeds: these Govinda dispatched to
Dvaraka, in charge of the servants of Naraka.
Thc umbrella of Varuna, the jewel mountain
which he also recovered, he placed upon
Garuda; and mounting him himself, and
taking Satyabhama with him, he sct off to the
heaven of the gods, to restore the earrings of
Aditi’,

KKK

NOTES

1 By Visnu. as the Varaéha Avatara; but found
and adopted by Janaka. Kalika Purana

2 In the centre of the country of Kamartpa,
inhabited by Kiratas ; the site of the shrines of
Devi, as Dikkaravasini and Kamakhya. Kalika
Purana.

3 Theae were captive princesscs, according to
the Bhagavata; Aparasas, or cclestial nymphs,
according to the Kalika Purana; and these upon
their rescue by Krsna became his wives.

4 The legend of Naraka is related in more detail
in the Bhagavata and Hari Vamésa. but is still more
fully narrated in the Kalika Upapurana. It may be
considered as one of the various intimations that
occur in the Puranas of hostilities between the
worshippers of Visnu and Siva; Naraka being in an
especial degree favoured by the latter.
