2३6

THE VISNU-PURANAM

एक आसीद् यजुर्वेदस्तं ugat व्यकल्ययत्।
चातुर्होत्रमभूद् यस्मिंस्तेन यज्ञमथाकरोत्।। ११॥
औद्गात्रं सामभिश्चक्रे ब्रह्मत्वं चाप्यथर्वभि:।। १२॥
तत: स ऋचमुद्धृत्य ऋग्वेदं कृतवान् AA:
यजूंषि च यजुर्वॆदं सामवेदञ्च सामभि:। १३॥
राज्ञस्त्वथर्ववेदेन सर्वकर्माणि च प्रभु:।
कारयामास ya! ब्रह्मत्वञ्च यथास्थिति।। १४॥

There was but one Yajurveda; but dividing
this into four parts, Vyasa instituted the
sacrificial rite that is administered by four
kinds of priests : in which it was the duty of
the Adhvaryu to recite prayers (Yajus) (or
direct the ceremony); of the Hotri, to repeat
the hymns (Rcas); of the Udgatri, to chant
other hymns (Sama); and of the Brahmana, to
pronounce the formulae called Atharva. Then
the Muni, having collected together the hymns
called Rcas, compiled the Rgveda; with the
prayers and directions termed Yajusas he
formed the Yajurveda; with those called Sama,
Sdmaveda; and with the Atharvas he
composed the rules of all the ceremonies
suited to kings and the function of the
Brahmana agreeably to practice’.

सोऽयमेको महावेदस्तरुस्तेन पृथक्कृत:।

चतुर्धा तु ततो जातं वेदपादपकाननम्॥ १५॥
विभेदं werd विप्र de ऋग्वेदपादपम्।
इन्द्रप्रमितये Wels बास्कलाय च संहिते॥ १६॥
चतुर्धा स विभेदाथ बास्कलिद्विज! संहिताम्।
बौध्यादिभ्यो ददौ तास्तु शिष्येभ्य: स महामुनि:॥ १७॥
बौध्याग्निमाठरौ तद्वद् याज्ञवल्क्यपराशरौ।
प्रतिशाखास्तु शाखायास्तस्यास्ते जगृहुर्मुने॥। १८॥
माण्डुकेयं महात्मानं मैत्रेयाध्यापयत् तदा।। १९॥
तस्य शिष्यप्रशिष्येभ्य: पुत्रशिष्यान् sae ययौ।
वेदमित्रस्तु शाकल्य: संहितां तामधीतवान्।। २०॥
wart संहिता: पञ्च शिष्येभ्य: प्रददौ च ता:।

तस्य शिष्यास्तु ये पञ्च तेषां नामानि मे शृणु।। २१॥
मुद्गलो गोमुखश्चैव वात्स्य: शालीय एव च।
शिशिर: पञ्चमश्लासीन्मैत्रेय! सुमहामुनि:।। २२॥
निरुक्तमकरोत् age मुनिसत्तम।। २३॥
क्रौञ्चो वैतालिकस्तद्वद् बलाकश्च महामति:।
निरुक्तकृचतुर्थोऽभूद् वेदवेदाङ्गपारग:।॥ २४॥
इत्येता: प्रतिशाखाभ्योऽप्यनुशाखा fase!
बास्कलिश्चापरास्तिस्र: संहिता: कृतवान् द्विज।। २५॥
fora: कालायनिर्गार्श्यस्तृतीयश्च कथाजव:। ।
इत्येते बहुधा प्रोक्ता: संहिता यै: प्रवर्तिता:॥२६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे चतुर्थोऽध्याय:॥

This vast original tree of the Vedas, having
been divided by him into four principal stems,
soon branched out into an extensive forest. In
the first place, Paila divided the Rgveda and
gave the two Sarhhités (or collections of
hymns) to Indrapramati and to Baskali.
Baskali® subdivided his Sarhhité into four,
which he gave to his disciples Baudhya,
Agnimathara, Yajfiavalkya and Parasara; and
they taught these secondary shoots from the
primitive branch, Indrapramati imparted his
Samhita to his son Mandukeya and it thence
descended through successive generations, as
well as disciples.’ Vedamitra, called also
Sakalya, studied the same Samhita, but he
divided it into five Sarhhité, which he
distributed amongst many disciples, named
severally Mudgala, Gosvalu, Vatsya, Saliya
and Sigira®, Sakaptirni made a different
division of the original Sarhhita into three
portions and added a glossary (Nirukta),
constituting a fourth’. The three Sarnhitds were
given to his three pupils, Kraufica, Vaitalaki
and Valaka; and a fourth, (hence named)
Niruktakrt, had the glossary'®. In this way
branch sprang from branch. Another Bagkali"”
composed three other Sarhités, which he
taught to his disciples Kalayani, Gargya and
Kathajava’. These are they by whom the
