BOOK I, CHAP. 17

His father then endeavoured to persuade
him to refrain from glorifying his enemy, and
promised him immunity if he .would not be so
foolish as to persevere: but Prahlada replied,
that he felt no fear as long as his immortal
guardian against all dangers was present in his
mind, the recollection of whom was alone
sufficient to dissipate all the perils consequent
upon birth or human infirmities.

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

भो भो: सर्पा! ढुराचारमेनमत्यन्त दुर्मतिम्।
विषज्वालाकुलैर्वक्त्रै: सद्यो नयत संक्षयम्॥ ३७॥

पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्तास्तेन ते सर्पा: कुहकास्तक्षकान्धका।
अदशन्त समस्तेषु गात्रेष्वतिविषोल्वणा:॥ ३ ८॥
स त्वासक्तमति: HON दश्यमानो महोरगै:।
न विवेदात्मनो गात्रं तत्स्मृत्याह्लादसंस्थित:।। ३ ९॥

Hiranyakasipu, highly exasperated,
commanded the serpents to fall upon his
disobedient and insame son, and bite him to
death-with their envenomed fangs: and
thereupon the great snakes Kuhaka, Taksaka,
and Andhaka, charged with fatal poison, bit
the prince in every pare of his body; but he,
with thoughts immovably fixed on Krsna.felt
no pain from their wounds, being immersed in
rapturous recollections of that divinity.

सर्पा: ऊचु:
`फणेषु ATG हृदयेषु: कम्प:।
प्रशाधि deat! कार्यमन्यत्।।४०॥

Then the snakes cried to the king. and said.
"Our fangs are broken; our jewelled crests are
burst; there is fever in our hoods, and fear in
our hearts; but the skin of the youth is still
unscathed: have recourse, monarch of the
Daityas, to some other expedient.”

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
हे दिग्गजा:! सङ्कटदन्तमिश्रा!

it

घ्नतैनमस्मद्रिपुपक्षभिन्नम्।
तज्जा विनाशाय भवन्ति तस्य
यथारणे: प्रज्वलितो हुताश:।॥४१॥

Ho. elephants of the skies" exclaimed the
demon, “unite your tusks, and destroy this
deserter from his father, and conspirer with my
foes. It is thus that often our progeny are our
destruction as fire consumes the wood from
which it springs.
पराशर उवाच

तत: स दिग्गजैर्बालो भूभृच्छिखिरसन्निभै:।

पातितो धरणीपृष्ठे विषाणैरवपीडित:॥४२॥

स्मरतस्तस्य गोविन्दमिभदन्ता: सहस्रश:।

शीर्णा वक्ष:स्थलं प्राप्य स प्राह पितरं तत:॥४३॥।
शीर्णा यदेते न बलं ममैतत्।

महाविपत्पापविनाशनोऽयं
जनार्दनानुस्मरणानुभाव:॥४४॥

The young prince was then assailed by the
elephants of the skies, as vast as mountain
peaks; cast down upon the earth, and trampled
on, and gored by their tusks: but he continucd
to call to mind Govinda, and the tusks of the
elephants were blunted against his breast.
"Behold,” he said to his father, "the tusks of
the elephants, as hard as adamant, are blunted;
but this is not by any strength of mine: calling
upon Janarddana is my defence against such
fearful affliction."

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

ज्वाल्यतामसुरा! वह्निरपसर्पत दिग्गजा:।

वायो समेधयाग्निं त्वं दह्यतामेष पापकृत्।। ४५॥
पराशर उवाच

महाकाष्ठचयच्छन्नमसुरेन्द्रसुतं तत:।

प्रज्वाल्य दानवा वह्निं ददहु: स्वामिनोदिता:॥४६॥

Then said the king to his attendants,
"Dismiss the elephants, and let fire consume
him; and do you, deity of the winds, blow up
the fire, that this wicked wretch may be
