BOOK III, CHAP. 1

225

Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa substitute for the
sons, the grandsons of Svayambhuva, Agnidhra and
the rest (Bk. II. Ch. 1).

2. This Manu, according to the legend of his
birth in the Markandeya Purina, was the son of
Svarocisa, so named from the splendour of his
appearance when born and who was the son of the
nymph Varuthini by the Gandharba Kali. The text,
in another place, makes him a son of Priyavrata.

3. The Vayu gives the names of the individuals
of these two classes, consisting each of twelve. It
furnishes also the nomenclature of all the classes of
divinities and of the sons of the Manus in each
Manvantara. According to the same authority, the
Tusitas were the sons of Kratu : the Bhagavata calls
them the sons of Tusita by Vedasiras. The divinities
of each period are according to the Vayu, those to
whom offerings of the Soma juice and the like are
presented collectively.

4. The Vayu describes the Rsis of each
Manvantara as the sons or in some cases the
descendants in. a direct line, of the seven sages,
Atri, Angiras, Bhrgu, KaSyapa, Pulaha, Pulastya
and Vasistha; with some inconsistency, for
Kasgyapa, at least, did not appear himself until the
seventh Manvantara. In the present series Urja is
the son of Vasistha. Stambha springs from
Kasyapa, Prana from Bhrgu, Dattoli is the son of
Pulastya, Rsabha descends from Arigiras, Niscara
from Atri and Arvarivat is the son of Pulaha. The
Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa have a rather
different list or Aurva, Stambha, Kasgyapa, Prana,
Brhaspati, Cyavana and Dattoli: but the origin of
part of this difference is nothing more than an
imperfect quotation from the Vayu Purdina; the two
first, Aurva and Stambha, being specified as the son
of Vasistha and the descendant of Kasyapa and then
the parentage of the rest being omitted : to
complete the seven, therefore, Kasyapa becomes
one of them. Some other errors of this nature occur
in these two works and from the same cause,
blundering citation of the Vayu, which is named as
their authority (एते महर्षयस्तात वायुप्रोक्ता महाव्रता:). A
curious peculiarity also occurs in these mistakes.
They are confined to the first eight Manvantaras.
The Brahma Purana omits all details of the last six
and the Hari Varhga inserts them fully and
correctly, agreeably to the authority of the Vayu. It
looks, therefore, as if the compiler of the Hari

Varhsa had followed the Brahma, as far as it went,
right or wrong : but had bad recourse to the original
Vayu P, when the Brahma failed him. Dattoni is
sometimes written Dattoli and Dattotri; and the
latter appears to have been the case with the copy
of the Hari Varnsa employed by M. Langlois, who
makes one of the Rsis of this Manvantara, "le
penitent Atri." He is not without countenance in
some such reading, for the Padma Purana changes
the name to Dattatreya, no doubt suggested by
Datta-atri. Dattatreya, however, is the son of Atri;
while the Vayu calls the person of the text the son
of Pulastya. There can be no doubt therefore of the
correct reading, for the son of Pulastya is Dattoli.
(Bk, I. Ch. X.)

5. The Vayu agrees with the text in these names,
adding seven others. The Bhagavata has a different
series. The Padma has four other names, Nabha,
Nabhasya, Prasrti, Bhavana. The Brahma has ten
names, including two of these and several of the
names of the Rsis of the tenth Manvantara. The
Matsya has the four names of the Padma for the
sons of the Manu and gives seven others,
Havindhra, Sukrta, Martti, Apas, Jyotir, Aya, Smrta
(the names of the Brahm), as the seven Prajapatis
of this period and sons of Vasistha. The sons of
Vasistha, however, belong to the third Manvantara
and bear different appellations. There is, no doubt,
some blundering here in all the books except the
Vayu and those which agree with it.

6. The name occurs Auttami, Auttama and
Uttama. The Bhagavata and Vayu agree with our
text (Bk. III. Ch. D in making him a descendant
from Priyavraia. The Markandeya calls him the son
of Uttama, the son of Uttanapada : and this appears
to be the correct genealogy, both from our text and
the Bhagavata.

7. The Brahma and Hari Varhsa have, in
place of these, the Bhanus; but the Vayu and
Markandeya concur with the text.

8. All the authorities agree in this: but the
Brahma and Hari Varisa appear to furnish a
different series also; or even a third, according to
the French translation ‘Dans le troisieme
Manvantara parurent comme Saptarchis leg fils de
Vasichtha, de son nom appeles Vasichthas, les fils
de Hiranyagarbha et les illustres enfans d'Ourdja.'

The text is, वसिष्ठपुत्रा: wae, वासिष्ठा इति विश्रुता:।
