BOOK II, CHAP. 3

57. This and the preceding both rise from
theVindhya mountain : the latter is also read
Antahsila, ‘the river flowing within or amidst
rocks.'

58. Also Paroksa.

59. We have a Surana in the Vayu and Surasa in
the Karma and Matsya, flowing from the Rksa
mountain.

60. The Tamaga or Tonse, from Rksa.

61. This and the preceding scarcely merit a place
amongst the rivers, being two small streains which
fall into the Ganga east and west of Benares, which
is thence denominated Varanasi.

62. Parndsé or Varnasa from the Paripatra
mountain.

63. Also Manavi.

64. The Krsna of the Dakhin is probably here
intended, although its more ordinary designation
seems to be that already specified. Krishnavena or
Krisnaveni. The meaning is much the same; the one
being the ‘dark river,' the other simply the ‘dark’ the
Niger.

65. A river from Suktimat; Vayu.

66. A river in Cuttack, according to Wilford : it
is one of the Tirthas of the Mahabharata. and
apparently in a diflerent direction, Buchanan
(Eastern Hindustan) has a river of this name in
Dinajpur.

67. Both from the Vindhya : Vayu and Kirma.
There is a Goaris in Plolemy in central India.

68 From Rksa : Vayu.

69. Also Munja and Makaravahini.

70. From Rksa : Vayu. According to the
Mahabharata, it rises in the mountain Chitrakote.

71. The Vaitarani in Cuttack. It is named in the
Mahabharata as a river of Kalinga.

72. Also read Nipa and Koka.

73. From Rksa, but read also Suktimati. which is
the reading of the Matsya. Wilford considers it to
be the Svarnarekha of Cuttack.

74. Also An&gé and Suranga; perhaps the
preferable reading should be Sumanga. a river
flowing from Mainaka. according to the Mahéa-
bharata.

75. Part of the Brahmaputra.

76. A considerable river in the east, flowing
between Dinajpur and Rangpur.

159

77. Also Vrsasahva.

78. This and the preceding flow from Suktimat,
according to the Vayu, Matsya and Kiirma. The last
occurs also in Rsika.

79. Also Suparna. The Punyd is considered to be
the Pun-pun of Bihar. but there is also a Parna river
in the same province.

80. It is possible that further research will
identify more than those attempted to be verified in
the foregoing notes, as well as meet with others
readily recognizable. In the authorities consulted
several occur not comprehended in the text: as the
Kuhu and Iksu. from the Himdlaya; Vrtraghni,
Candan4 (Chandan of Bhagalpur), Mahi (the Mahy
of western Malwa), Sipra, and Avanti (rivers near
Ujjain), from Paripatra; Mahdnada in Orissa,
Druma, Dasarna (Dhosaun in Bundelkhand).
Chitrakiita, Sroni or Syena, Pisachika, Banjula,
Baluvahini, and Matkuna, all from  Rksa,
Nirvindhya, Madr’. Nisadha, Sinibahu, Kumudvati
and Toya, from Vindhya; Banjula from Sahya;
Krtamala, Tamraparni. Puspajati. and Utpalavati
from Malaya, Langulini and Vansadhara, from
Mahendra; and Mandaga and Krpa or Ripa, from
Suktimat. In the Ramayana we have, besides some
already specified, the Ruchiré, Pampa, eastern
Sarasvati. Vegavati or Vyki of Madura, and Varada
or Wurda of Berar: and we have many others in the
Mahabharata and different works, from which the
Sanskrit appellations of most of the Indian rivers
might be with some little time and _ trouble,
collected.

PEOPLE AND COUNTRIES

Next hear from me, descendant of Bharata, the
names of the inhabitants of the different countries.
They are the Kurus, Pajicalas,! Salwas, Madreyas,
and dwellers in thickets (Jangalas), Strsenas,’
Kalinga,’ Bodhas,’ Malas,’ Matsyas,° Sukutyas,’
Sauvalyas," Kuntalas,’ KagikoSalas,'° Cedyas,"’
Matsyas,'” Karushas,'? Bhojas,'* Sindhupulindas,”°

Uttamas,'© Dagarnas,!? Mekalas,"® Ulkalas’””
। Kausijas,”' Naikaprishthas,””
Dhutandharas,” — Sodhas,”* Madrabhujingas क

Kasis,”° Aparakasis, Jatharas, Kukuras, Dasarnas,
Kuntis, Avantis,”’ Aparakuntis,”* Goghnatas,”®
Mandakas, Shandas,*” Vidarbhas,’’ Riipavahikas.**
Aswakas,® Pansurashtras, Goparashtras,* Karitis,”°
the people of Adhivajya,** Kuladya,?”
