BOOK IV, 1

299

daughter Ila, was produced.*> Through the
favour of the two divinities, however, her sex
was changed and she became a man, named
Sudyumna. At a subsequent period, in
consequence of becoming subject to the
effects of a malediction once pronounced by
Siva, Sudyumna was again transformed to a
woman in the vicinity of the hermitage of
Budha, the son of the deity of the moon.
Budha saw and espoused her and had by her a
son named Puriravas. After his birth, the
illustrious sis, desirous of restoring
Sudyumna to his sex, prayed to the mighty Vis
nu, who is the essence of the four Vedas, of
mind, of everything and of nothing; and who is
in the form of the sacrificial male; and through
his favour [4 once more became Sudyumna,
in which character he had three sons, Utkala,
Gaya and Vinata.°

सुद्युम्नस्तु स्रीपूर्वकत्वाद् राज्यभागं न लेभे॥। १२॥
तत् पित्रा तु वसिष्ठवचनात् प्रतिष्ठानं नाम नगरं सुद्युम्नाय

दत्तम्।
wart पुरूरवसे प्रादात्। पृषध्रस्तु गुरुगोवधात्
शूद्रत्वमगमत्।। १३॥

In consequence of his having been formerly
a female, Sudyumna was excluded from any
share in his paternal dominions; but his father,
at the suggestion of Vasistha, bestowed upon
him the city Pratisthana’ and he gave it to
Purdravas. Of the other sons of the Manu, Prs
adhra, in consequence of the crime of killing a
cow, was degraded to the condition of a
Sudra.*

करूषात् कारूषा महाबला: क्षत्रिया बभूवु:।। १४॥

नाभागो नेदिष्ठपुत्रस्तु वैश्यतामगमत्॥ १५॥

तस्माद् भलन्दन: पुत्रोऽभवत्। भलन्दनाद्दत्सप्रि-
रुदारकीर्ति:)। वत्सप्रे:` प्रांशुरभवत्, प्रजानिश्च
प्रांशोरेकोऽभवत्, ततश्च खनित्र:, तस्माच्च क्षुप:, goer
अतिबलपराक्रमोऽविविंशोऽभवत्। ततो विविंश, तस्माच्च
Tita, ततश्चातिविभूति:, अतिविभूतेर्भुरिबलपराक्रम:
करन्धम: पुत्रोऽभवत्। तस्मादप्यविक्षि:, अविक्षेरप्यतिबल:
Yat मरुत्तोऽभवत्॥ १६॥

मरुत्तस्य यथा यज्ञस्तथा कस्याभवद् भुवि:।

wea हिरण्मयं यस्य यज्ञ वस्त्वतिशोभनम्।।

अमाद्यदिन्द्र: सोमेन दक्षिणाभिरद्विजातय: (च)।

wed: परिवेष्टार: सदस्याश्च दिवौकस:। १७॥

`मरुत्तश्चक्रवर्ती नरिष्यन्तनामानं पुत्रमवाप। TTR दम:),
दमस्य पुत्रो राज्यवर्द्धनो जज्ञे। राज्यवर्द्धनात् सुधृतिरभूत्।

वेगवान्, वेगवतो बुध:, Ad: तृणबिन्दु:, तस्याप्येका कन्या
इलिबिला नाम। तञ्चालम्बुषा नाम वराप्सरा तृणबिन्दुं भेजे।
तस्यामस्य विशालो जज्ञे; a: पुरीं वैशालीं नाम निर्म्ममे।
हेमचन्द्रश्च विशालस्य पुत्रोऽभवत्। तस्माच्च सुचन्द्र:) तत्तनयो
धूम्राश्च:)। तस्यापि सृञ्जयोऽभूत्। सृञ्जयात् सहदेव:, तत:
कृशाश्वो नाम पुत्रोऽभूत्। सोमदत्त: कृशाश्वाज्जज्ञे; यो
दशाश्वमेधानाजहार। तत्पुत्रश्च जनमेजय: जनमेजयात् सुमति:।
Wt वैशालका भूभृत:।। १८॥

From Kariisa descended the mighty
warriors termed Ka4riisas (the sovereigns of the
north).’ The son of Nedistha, named Nabhaga,
became a Vaisya;'° his son was
Bhalandana;''whose son was the celebrated
Vataspri’”; Pransu; whose son was ।
whose son was Khanitra;'* whose son was the
very valiant Caksupa;'® whose son was
Virhga;'* whose son was Vivirhgati;'’ whose
son was Khaninetra; whose son was the
powerful, wealthy and valiant Karandhama;'*
whose son was Aviksi (or Aviksit)"”; whose
son was the mighty Marutta, of whom this
well known verse is recited; "There never was
beheld on earth a sacrifice equal to the
sacrifice of Marutta: al the implements and
utensils were made of gold. Indra was
intoxicated with the libations of Soma juice
and the Brahmanas were enraptured with the
magnificent donations they received. The
winds of heaven encompassed the rite as
guards and the assembled gods attended to
behold it."?? Marutta was a Cakravartti or
universal monarch : he had a son named Naris
yanta;"' his son was Dama;” his son was
Rajyavardhana; his son was Sudhrti; his son
was Nara; his son was Kevala; his son was
