BOOK IV, 4
वीरसेनसुतान्नलादन्यो। ‘Nala the son of Nisadha is

different from Nala the son of Virasena.' It is also
to be observed, that the Nala of the tale is king of
Nisadha and his friend Rituparna is king of
Ayodhya. The Nala of the race of Iksvaku is king
of Ayodhya : he is the son of Nisadha, however and
there is evidently some confusion between the two.
We do not find Virasena or his son in any of the
lists. See n. 19.

10. There is considerable variety in this part of
the lists, but the Vayu and Bhagavata agree with
our text. The Matsya and others make Kalmasapada
the son or grandson of Rituparna and place
Sarvakama or Sarvakarman after him. See further
on.

ll. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma and Hari Varhsa
read Amitrasaha, ‘foe-enduring’; but the
commentator on our text explains it Mitra, a name
of Vasistha, Saha, ‘able to bear’ the imprecation of;
as in the following legend, which is similarly
related in the Bhagavata. It is not detailed in the
Vayu. A full account occurs in the Mahabharata,
Adi Parva, s.176, but with many and important
variations. Kalmasapada, while hunting,
encountered Saktri, the son of Vasistha, in the
woods; and on his refusing to make way, struck the
sage with his whip. Saktri cursed the king to
become a cannibal; and Visvamitra, who had a
quarrel with Vasistha, seized the opportunity to
direct a Raksasas to take possession of the king,
that he might become the instrument of destroying
the family of the rival saint. While thus influenced,
Mitrasaha, a Brahmana, applied to Kalmasapada for
food and the king commanded his cook to dress
human flesh and give it to the Brahmana, who,
knowing what it was, repeated the course of Saktri,
that the king should become a cannibal; which
taking effect with double force. Kalmagapaida
began to eat men. One of his first victims was
Saktri, whom he slew and ate; and then killed and
devoured, under the secret impulse of Visvamitra's
demon, all the other sons of Vasistha. Vasistha
however liberated him from the Raksasas who
possessed him and restored him to his natural
character. The imprecation of the Brahmana's wife
and its consequences, are told in the Mahabharata
as in the text, but the story of the water falling on
his feet appears to have grown out of the etymology
of his name, which might have referred to some

329

disease of the lower extremities the prince's
designation being at length, Mitrasaha Saudasa
Kalmasapada or Mitrasaha, son of Sudasa, with the
swelled feet.

12. His name Milaka or 'the root', refers also to
his being the stem whence the Ksatriya races again
proceeded. It may be doubted if the purpose of his
title Narikavaca is accurately explained by the text.

13. This prince is confounded with an earlier
Dilipa by the Brahma Purana and Hari Vara.

14. The term for his obtaining final liberation is
rather unusual; त्रयोऽभिसंहिता लोका: ‘By whom the
three worlds were affected or beloved : विषयी कृता:।
the three worlds being identified with their source
or the supreme. The text says of this stanza, श्रूयते।
and the Vayu, citing it, says इति fa: 1 the legend is
therefore from the Vedas.

15. The lists here differ very materially, as the
following comparison will best show :

Visnu Matsya Ramayana
Kalmasapada Kalmasapada § Kalmasapada
Asmaka Sarvakarman = Sankana
Milaka Anaranya Sudargana
Da§garatha Nighna Agnivarna
Havila Anamitra Sighraga
Visvasaha Raghu Maru
Dilipa Dilipa Prasusruka
Dirghabahu Aja Ambarisa
Raghu Dirghabahu Nahusa
Aja Ajapala Yayati
Dasaratha Dasaratha Nabhaga
Aja
Dasaratha

The Vayu, Bhagavata, Kirma and Linga agree
with our text, except in the reading or a few names;
as Sataratha for Dasaratha the first; Vairivira for
Ilavilaj and Kritasarman, Vrddhasarman or
Vrddhakarman, for ViSvasaha. The Agni and
Brahma and Hari Vamsa agree with the second
series, with similar occasional exceptions; showing
that the Puranas admit two series, differing in
name, but agreeing in number. The Ramayana,
however, differs from both in a very extraordinary
manner and the variation is not limited to the cases
specified, as it begins with Bhagiratha, as follows :

Purdnas Ramayana
Bhagiratha Bhagiratha
Sruta Kakutstha
Nabhaga Raghu
