166

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Prinsep. (J.As. Soc, Beng. Feb. 1838,) Yona: the
term Yona Raji being there associated with the
name Antiochus, in all likelihood Antiochus the
Great, the ally of the Indian prince Sophagasenas,
about B. C. 210. That the Macedonian or Bactrian
Greeks were most usually intended is not only
probable from their position and relations with
India, but from their being usually named in
concurrence with the north-western _ tribes,
Kambojas, Daradas, Paradas, Bahlikas, Sakas. &c.
in the Ramayana, Mahabharata, Purdnas, Manu and
in various poems and plays.

145. Chinas or Chinese, or rather the people of
Chinese Tarlary, are named in the Ramayana and
Manu, as well as in the Puranas. If the designation
China was derived from the Tsin dynasty, which
commenced B, C. 260. this forms a limit of
antiquity for the works in question. The same word
however, or Tsin, was the ancient appellation of the
northern province of Shen-sy, and it may have
reached the Hindus from thence at an earlier period.

146. These Wilford regards as the people of
Arachosia. They are always mentioned together
with the north-western tribes, Yavanas, Sakas, and
the like: they are also famous tor their horses: and
in the Rimayana they are said to be covered with
golden lotuses : कमलैश्चापि काम्बोजानपि संवृतान्।
What is meant is doubtful, probably some ornament
or embellishment of their dress. We have part of the
name of Kambi, in the Cambistholi of Arrian: the
last two syllables, no doubt, represent the Sanskrit
Sthala, 'place’ ‘district;' and the word denotes the
dwellers in the Kamba or Kambis country: so
Kamboja may be explained those born in Kamba or
Kambas.

147. Also Sakridvaha or Sakridguha.

148. Also Kulachchas and Kuntalas: the Puranas
have Kupathas amongst the mountain tribes.

149. Also Parataka: the first is not a common
form in the Puranas, although it is in poetical
writings, denoting, no doubt, the Persians, or
people of Pars or Fars: the latter, also read Paradas,
may imply the same, as beyond (Para) the Indus.

150. We nave Ramathas in Nakula's Dig-vijaya.
and in the Vayu and Matsya.

151. DaSamanas and Degamanikas, in the north:
Vayu and Matsya.

152. The passage occurs in the Vayu and
Markandaya Puranas, as well as in_ the

Mahabharata; but the purport is not very distinct,
and the proper reading is doubtful. In three MSS. of
the latter it occurs क्षत्रियो यानि वेशाश्च वश्यशूद्रानि कुलानि च।
the latter pada is the same in all: the former, in a
fourth copy. is क्षत्रियोपरिकेशाश्च। in two copies of the
Vayu it is क्षत्रियोयजिवशाश्च। None of these are
intelligible, and the Markandeya furnishes the
reading followed, क्षत्रियोपनिवरेशाश्च = Modern
geographers have supposed the Cathaei. Cathari
and Chatriaei of the ancients, in the lower parts of
the Punjab, to mean a people of Ksatriyas; but no
such people occur directly named in our lists.
Considering that the text is speaking of barbarous
and foreign tribes, perhaps no particular nation is
here meant, and it may be intended as an epithet of
those which follow, or of Vaigya (agricultural) and
Siidra (servile or low) tribes, living either near to or
after the manlier of Ksatriyas: in that case a better
reading would be, च।
According to Manu various northern tribes, the
Sakas, Kambojas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Kiratas.
Daradas and Khasas and even the Chinas and
Yavanas, are degraded Ksatriyas, in conseqnencc of
neglecting religious rites. X.43,44. According to
the Paurinik legend they were overcome in war by
Sagara, and degraded from their original caste, See
book IV.

153. Here we have a people called Sidras by all
the authorities, and placed in the west or north-
west, towards the Indus. They have been
ingeniously, and with probability, conjectured by
Lassen to be the Oxydracae; for Siidraka is equally
correct with Sidra; and in place of OsvdpaxKai
various MSS. of Strabo. as quoted by Siebenkees.
read ¢idpaxai and Evépéxai: the latter is precisely
the Sanskrit appellation. Pliny also has Sudraci for
the people who formed the limit of Alexander's
eastern conquests, or those hitherto inaccurately
called Oxydraces.

154. These are always conjoined with the
Sudras, as if conterminous. Tncir situation is no
doubt correctly indicated by Ptolemy by the
position of Abiria above Pattalene on the Indus.

155. The Durds are still where they were at the
date of our text. and in the days of Strabo and
Ptolemy; not exactly, indeed, at the sources of the
Indus, but along its course, above the Himalaya,
just before it descends to India; a position which
might well be taken for its head.
