136 -

THE VISNU-PURANAM

of the whole world—being threefold—in the
several seasons of creation, preservation, and
destruction, according to his assumption of the
three qualities: but his highest glory’ is
detached from all qualities; for the fourfold
essence of the supreme spirit is composed of
true wisdom, pervades all things, is only to be
appreciatcd by itself, and admits of no
similitude,
axa उवाच

चतु:प्रकारतां तस्य ब्रह्मभूतस्य वै मुने।

ममाचक्ष्व यथान्यायं यदुक्तं परमं पदम्॥४२॥

Maitreya said—But, Muni, describe to me

fully the four varieties of the condition of
Brahma, and what is the supreme condition‘.
पराशर उवाच

साध्यञ्च वस्त्वभिमतं यत्साधयितुमात्मन:॥४३॥

योगिनो मुक्तिकामस्य प्राणायामादिसाधनम्।

साध्यञ्च परमब्रह्म पुनर्नावर्त्तते यत:।।४४॥

साधनालम्बनं ज्ञानं मुक्तये योगिनो हि यत्।

स भेद: प्रथमस्तस्य ब्रह्मभूतस्य वै मुने।।४५॥

युञ्जत: क्लेशमुक्त्यर्थं साध्यं ae get योगिन:।

Parasara replied—That, Maitreya, which is
the cause or a thing is called the means of
effecting it; and that which it is the desire of
the soul to accomplish is the thing to be
effected. The operations of the Yogi who is
desirous of liberation, as suppression of breath
and the like, are his means: the end is the
supreme Brahm4, whence he returns to the
world no more. Essentially connected with,
and dependant upon, the means employed for
emancipation by the Yogi, is discriminative
knowledge; and this is the first variety of the
condition of Brahma’.

तदालम्बनविज्ञानं द्वितीयोऽंशो महामुने।। ४६॥
उभयोस्त्वविभागेन साध्यसाधनयोर्हि यत्।
विज्ञानमद्वैतमयं तद्भागोऽन्यो मयोदित:॥४७॥
ज्ञानत्रयस्य चैतस्य विशेषो यो महामुने।

तन्निराकरणद्दारा दर्शितात्मस्वरूपवत्॥।४८॥
निर्व्यपारमनाख्येयं व्याप्तिमात्रमनौपमम्।
आत्मसंम्बोधविषयं सत्तामात्रमलक्षणम्।। ४९॥
प्रशान्तमभयं शुद्धमविभाव्यमसंश्रितम्।
विष्णोर्जानमयस्योक्तं तज्ञानं परमं पदम्।५०॥

The second sort is knowledge that is to be
acquired by the Yogi whose end is escape
from suffering, or eternal felicity. The third
kind ts the ascertainment of the identity of the
end and the means, the rejection of the notion
of duality. The last kind is the removal of
whatever differences may have been
conceived by the three first varities of
‘knowledge, and the consequent contemplation
of the true essence of soul. The supreme
condition of Visnu, who is one with wisdom,
is the knowledge of truth; which requires no
exercise; which is not to be taught; which is
internally diffused; which is unequalled; the
object of which is self-illumination; which is
simply existent, and is not to be defined;
which is tranquil, fearless, pure; which is not
the theme of reasoning; which stands in need
of no support’.

तत्रान्यज्ञानरोधेन योगिनो यान्ति A लयम्।
संसारकर्षणोप्तौ ते यान्ति निर्बीजतां द्विज॥। ५ १॥
एवम्प्रकारममलं नित्यं व्यापकमक्षयम्।
समस्तभेदरहितं विष्णवाख्यं परमं पदम्।। ५२॥
तद् Ta परमं योगी यतो नावर्त्तते पुन:।
अपुण्यपुण्योपरमे क्षीणक्लेशोऽतिनिर्मल:॥ ५ ३॥

Those Yogis who, by the annihilation of
ignorance, are resolved into this fourfold
Brahm, lose the seminal property, and can no
longer germinate in the ploughed field of
worldly existence. This is the supreme
condition, that is called Visnu, perfect,
perpetual, universal, undecaying, entire, and
uniform: and the Yogi who attains this
supreme spirit (Brahma) returns not to life
again; for there he is freed from the distinction
of virtue and vice, from suffering, and from
soil.
