144

THE VISNU-PURANAM

calls the wife of Priyavrata. Barhismati. the
daughter of Visvakarman.

2. These names nearly agree in the authorities
which specify the descendants of Priyavrata, except
in the Bhagavata; that has an almost entirely
different series of names, or Agnidhra. Idhmajihwa,
Yajfiabahu. Mahavira, Hiranyaretas, Medhatithi,
Ghrtaprishtha, Savana. Vitihotra. and Kavi: with
one daughter, Urjjasvati. It also calls the Manus
Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata the sons of Priyavrata
by another wife.

3. According to the Bhagavata, he drove his
chariot seven times round the earth, and the ruts left
by the wheels became the beds of the oceans,
separating it into seven Dvipas.

4. Even the Bhagavata concurs with the other
Puranas in this series of Priyavrata's grandsons.

5. Of these divisions, as well as of those of the
earth, and of the minor divisions of the Vargas. we
have further particulars in the following chapter.

6. This place of pilgrimage has not been found
elsewhere. The term is usually applied to a stone,
an ammonite, which is supposed to be a type of Vis
nu. and of which the worship is enjoined in the
Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. and in the Brahma
Vaivartta, authorities of no great weight or
antiquity. As these stones are found chiefly in the
Gandak river, the Salagrama Tirtha was probably at
the source of that stream, or at its confluence with
the Gariga. Its sanctity, and that of the stone, are
probably of comparatively modem origin.

7, ‘The great road’ or ‘road of heroes’ (महाप्रस्थानं
or वीरस्थानं) The people was intended either to
compcl perpetual silence, or to prevent the eating.
The Bhagavata adverts to the same circumstance;
आस्ये कृताश्मकबल:। That work enters much more into
detail on the subject of Rsabha'a devotion, and
particularizes circumstances not found in any other
Purana. The mot interesting of these are the scene
of Rsabha's a wanderings, which is said to be
Konka, Venkata, Kitaka. and southern Karnataka,
or the western part of the Peninsula : and the
adoption of the Jain belief by the people of those
countries. Thus it is said, "A king of the Kankas,
Venkatas, and Kitakas. named Arhat, having heard
the tradition of Rsabha's practices (or his wandering
about naked, and desisting from religious rites),
being infatuated by necessity, under the evil
influence of the Kali age will become needlessly

alarmed, and abandon his own religious duty, and
will foolishly enter upon an unrighteous and
heretical path. Misled by him and bewildered by
the iniquitous operation of the Kali age, disturbed
also by the delusions.of the deity, wicked men will,
in great numbers, desert the institutes and
purifications of their own ritual; will observe vows
injurious and disrespectful to the gods : will desist
from ablutions, mouthwashings, and purifications,
and will pluck out the hair of the head; and will
revile the world, the deity, sacrifices. Brahmanas.
and the Vedas." It if also said, that Sumati the son
of Bharata, will be irreligiously worshipped by
some infidels, as a divinity. Besides the import of
the term Arhat, or Jain. Rsabha is the name of the
first, and Sumati of the fifth Térthankara, or Jain
saint of the present era. There can be no doubt,
therefore, that the Bhagavata intends this sect, and
as the Jain system was not matured until a com-
paratively modern date, this composition is
determined to be also recent. The allusions to the
extension of the Jain faith in the western parts of
the Peninsula, may serve to fix the limit of its
probable antiquity to the 11 or 12 century, when the
fains seem to have been flourishing in Guzerat and
the Konkan. As. Res. XVII. 282,

8. This etymology is given in other Puranas; but
the Matsya and Vayu have a different one, deriving
it from the Manu, called Bharata. Or the cherisher,
one who rears or cherishes progeny— भरणात्तु प्रजानां a
मनुर्भरत इत्युच्यते। निरुक्त्वचनाच्चैव af तद्भारतं स्मृतं। The Vayu
has, in another place, the more common
explanation also ; हिमाह्वं दक्षिणवर्षं तस्य (भरतस्य) नाम्ना
विदुर्बुधा:॥

9. The Agni. Karma, Markandeya, Linga, and
Vayu Purinas agree with the Visnu in these
genealogical details. The Bhagavata has some
additions and variations of nomenclature, but is not
essentially different. It ends, however, with Satajit,
and cites a stanza which would seem to make
Viraja the last of the descendants of Priyavrta :
यथा॥

10. The descendants of Priyavrata were the kings
of the earth in the first or Svayambhuva
Manvantara. Those of Uttanapdda his brother are
placed rather incongruously in the second or
Svarochisa Manvantara : whilst, with still more
palpable inconsistency. Daksa, a descendant of
