BOOK III, CHAP. 2

231

In the Krta age, Visnu, in the form of
Kapila and other inspired teachers, assiduous
for the benefit of all creatures, imparts to them
true wisdom. In the Treta age he restrains the
wicked, in the form of a universal monarch
and protects the three worlds.’* In the Dvapara
age, in the person of Veda-vydsa, he divides
the one Veda into four and distributes it into
innumerable branches: and at the end of the
Kali or fourth age he appears as Kaeki and re-
establishes the iniquitous in the paths of
rectitude. In this manner the universal spirit
preserves, creates and at last destroys, all the
world.

तदत्रान्यत्र वा fas: ! सद्भाव: कथितस्तव।।५९॥

मन्वन्तराण्यशेषाणि कथितानि मया तव।

मन्वन्तराधिपाश्चैव किमन्यत् कथयामि Fg ott
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे द्वितीयोऽध्याय:॥

Thus, Brahmana, I have described to you
the true nature of that great being who is all
things and besides whom there is no other
existent thing, nor has there been, nor will
there be, either here or elsewhere. I have also
enumerated to you the Manvantaras and those
who preside over them. What else do you wish
to hear?

kk,
NOTES

1. That is, her shadow or image. It also means
‘shade’. The Bhagavata, however, makes both
Sanjiaé and Chaya daughters of Visvakarman.
According to the Matsya, Vivasavat, the son of
Kasyapa and Aditi, had three wives, Rajni, the
daughter of Raivata, by whom he had Revanta;
Prabha, by whom he had Prabhata; and by Sanjiia,
the daughter of Tvastri, the Manu and Yama and
Yamuna. The storv then proceeds much as in the
text.

2. Yama, provoked at her partiality for her own
children, abused Chaya and lifted up his foot to
kick her. She cursed him to have his leg affected
with sores and worms; but his father bestowed upon
him a cock, to eat the worms and remove the
discharge; and Yama, afterwards propitiating

Mahadeva, obtained the rank of Lokapala and
sovereign of Tartarus.

3. The Matsya says he trimmed the sun every
where except in the feet, the extent of which is
could not discern. Consequently in pictures or
images the feet of the sun must never be delineated,
under pain of leprosy, etc.

4. The term of Sivika, which properly means 'a
litter’. The commentator calls it Astra, 'a weapon’.

5. This legend is told, with some variations of no
great importance, in the Matsya, Markandeya and
Padma Purana (Svarga Khanda), in the Bhagavata
and Hari Varhsa.

6. The Markandeya, while it admits Savarni to
be the son of the sun, has a legend of his former
birth, in the Svarocisa Manvantara, as Suratha Raja,
who became a Manu by having then propitiated
Devi. It was to him that the Durga Mahatmya or
Candi, .the popular narrative of Durga’s triumphs
over various demons, was narrated.

7. The Vayu has Jamadagnya or Parasurima, of
the Kusika race; Galava, of that of Bhrgu;
Dvaipayana (or Vy4sa), of the family of Vasistha,
Krpa, the son Saradvat; Diptimat, descended from
Atri; Rsyasrina, from Kasyapa; and Aégvatthaman,
the son of Drona, of the Bharadvaja family. The
Matsya and Padma have Satananda in place of
Diptimat.

8. The four following Savarnis are described in
the Vayu as the mind-engendered, sons of a
daughter of Daksa, named either Suvraté (Vayu) or
Priya (Brahma) by himself and the three gods,
Brahma, Dharma and Rudra, to whom he presented
her on mount Meru; whence they are called also
Meru-sfvarnis. They are termed Savarnis from their
being of one family or caste : i
ब्रह्मादीनां कुमारका:। सवर्णा मनवस्तेषां सवर्णत्वं च तेषु तत्।
According to the same authority, followed by the
Hari Varhsa, it appears that this Manu is also called
Rohita. Most of the details of this and the following
Manvantaras are omitted in the Matsya, Brahma,
Padma and Markandeya Puranas. The Bhagavata
and Kirma give the same as our text; and the Vayu,
which agrees very nearly with it, is followed in
most respects by the Hari Varhsa. The Matsya and
the Padma are peculiar in their series and
nomenclature of the Manus themselves, called the
9"" Raucya, 10 Bhautya, 11" Merusavarni, son of
Brahma, 12° Rtu, 13" Ritadhaman and 14"
