98

एष मे संशयो ब्रह्मन् सुमहान् aie वर्त्तते।

aa दौहित्र: स सोमस्य पुन: श्वशुरतां गत:॥८१॥

Maitreya said— Daksa. as I have formerly
heard, was born from the right thumb of
Brahma: tell me, great Muni. how he was
regenerate as the son of the Pracetasas.
Considerable perplexity also arises in my
mind, how he, who, as the son of M4risha, was
the grandson of Soma. could be also his
father-in-law.

पराशर उवाच
safes निरोधश्च नित्यौ भूतेषु सत्तम।
ॠषयोऽत्र न मुह्यन्ति ये चात्र दिव्यचक्षुष:।। ८ २॥
युगे युगे भवन्त्येते दक्षाद्या मुनिसत्तमा:।
पुनश्चैवं निरुध्यन्ते विद्वांस्तत्र न मुह्यति। ८ ३॥
तप एव गरीयोऽभूद् प्रभावश्चैव कारणम्। ८४॥

Parasara said—Birth and death are constant
in all-creatures: Rsis and sagcs, possessing
divine vision, are not perplexed by this. Daksa
and the other eminent Munis are present in
every age, .and in the interval of destruction
cease to be’: of this the wise man entertains no
doubt. Amongst them of old there was neither
senior nor junior; rigorous penance and
acquired power were the sole causes of any
difference of degree amongst these more than
human beings.

मैत्रेय उवाच
देवानां दानवानाञ्च गन्धर्वोरगरक्षसाम्।
safe विस्तरेणेह मम ger प्रकीर्त्तय।। ८५॥
Maitreya said— Narrate to me, O venerable

Brahman, at length, the birth of the gods,
Titans, Gandharvas, serpents, and goblins.

षराशर उवाच
प्रजा: सृजेति व्यादिष्ट: पूर्वं eat: स्वयम्भुवा।
यथा ससर्ज भूतानि तथा STO महामते।। ८६॥
मानसानि तु भूतानि पूर्वं दक्षोऽसृजत् तदा।
देवानृषीन् सगन्धर्वान् असुरान् पन्नगांस्तथा।। ८७॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

यदास्य द्विज मानस्यो नाभ्यवर्द्धन्त AT: प्रजा:।
तत: सञ्जिन्त्य स पुन: सृष्टिहेतो: प्रजापति:। ८ ८॥
मैथुनेनैव धर्मेण सिसृक्षुर्विविधा: प्रजा:।
असिक्नीमावहत् कन्यां वीरणस्य प्रजापते:।। ८ ९॥
ay पुत्रसहस्राणि वैरण्यां ws वीर्यवान्।। gy ont
असिक्न्यां जनयामास सर्गहेतो: प्रजापति:।

aM SBI नारदो विप्र: संविवर्द्धयिषून् प्रजा।
सङ्गम्य प्रियसंवादो देवर्षिरिदमब्रवीत्। ९१॥

Paragara said~ In what manner Daksa
created living creatures, as commanded by
Brahma, yon shall hear. In the first place he
willed into existence the deities: the Rsis,
quiristers of heaven, the Titans, and the snake-
gods. Finding that his will-born progeny did
not multiply themselvcs, he determined, in
ofder to secure their increase, to establish
sexual intercourse as the means of
multiplication. For this purpose he espoused
Asikni, the daughter of the patriarch Virana,' a
damsel addicted to devout practiceJ, the
eminent supportress of the world. By her the
great father of mankind begot five thousand
mighty sons, through whom he expected the
world should be peopled. Narada. the divine
Rsi, observing them desirous to multiply
posterity, approached them, and addressed
them in a friendly tone:

ANE उवाच

हे हर्यश्वा महावीर्या: प्रजा यूयं करिष्यथ।

ईदृशो ल्लक्ष्यते Gal भवतां श्रूयतामिदम्। ९ २॥

बालिशा बत यूयं वै नास्या जानीथ वै भुव:।

STRATES कथं स्रक्ष्यथ वै प्रजा:।। ९३॥

ag निर्य्यगधश्चैव ger प्रतिहता गति:।

तदा BANE Yar नान्तं सर्वं द्रक्ष्यथ बालिशा:।। ९४॥

Narada said~ “Illustrious Haryasvas, it is

evident that your intention is to beget
posterity; but first consider this; why should

you, who, like fools, know not the middle, the
height, and depth of the world,’ propagate
