BOOK V, CHAP. 73

तं कालयवनं नाम राज्ये स्वे यवनेश्वर:।
अभिषिच्य at यातो वज्राग्रकठिनोरसम्।। ५॥
स तु वीर्यमदोन्मत्त:, पृथिव्यां बलिनो नृपान्।
पप्रच्छ नारदस्तस्मै कथयामास यादवान्॥६॥
म्लेच्छकोटिसहस्राणां सहस्रौबर्हुभिर्वत:।
गजाश्वरथपत्त्योधैश्चकार परमोद्यमम्।। ७॥
प्रययौ चाव्यवच्छिनं छिन्नयानो दिने दिने।

यादवान् whet सामर्षो मेन्नेय! मथुरापुरीम्॥ ८॥

The Yavana king having placed his son,
whose breast was as hard as the point of the
thunderbolt, upon the throne, retired to the
woods. Inflated with conceit of his prowess,
Kalayavana demanded of Narada who were
the most mighty heroes on earth. To which the
sage answered, “The Yddavas." Accordingly
Kalayavana assembled many myriads of
Mlecchas and barbarians’, and with a vast
armamcnt of elephants, cavalry, chariot, and
foot, advanced impatiently against Mathura
and the'Yadavas, wearying every day the
animals that carried him, but insensible of
fatigue himself.

कृष्णोऽपि चिन्तयामास क्षयितं यादवं बलम्।
यवनेन रणे गम्यं मागधस्य भविष्यति।। ९॥
भागधस्य बलं क्षीणं स कालयवनो बली।

हन्ता तदिदमायातं यदूनां व्यसनं द्विधा॥ १०॥
तस्माद् gt करिष्यामि यदूनामतदुर्जयम्।
स्रियोऽपि यत्र युध्येयु: किं पुनर्वृष्णिपुङ्गवा:॥ ११॥

मयि wa प्रमत्ते वा सुप्ते प्रवसिते तथा।
यादवाभिभवं दुष्टा मा कुर्वन् परयोधका:।। १२॥

ययचे द्वादश पुरीं द्वारकां aa Fon १३॥
महोद्यानां महावप्रां तडागशतशोभिताम्।
प्रकारगृहसम्बाधमिन्द्रस्येवामरावतीम्॥ १४॥
मथुरावासिनो लोकांस्तत्रानीय जनार्द्दन:।
आसन्ने कालयवने मधुराञ्च स्वयं ययौ।। १५॥

When Krsna knew of his approach, he
reflected that if the Yadavas encountered the
Yavana, they would be so much weakened by

479

the conflict, that they would then be overcome
by the king of Magadha; that their force was
much reduced by the war with Magadha,
whilst that of Kalayavana was unbroken, and
that the enemy might be therefore victorious.
Thus the Yadavas were exposed to a double
danger. He resolved therefore to construct a
citadel for the Yadu tribe, that should not be
easily taken; one ‘that even women might
defend, and in which therefore the heroes of
the house of Vrisni should be secure; one in
which the male combatants of the Yadavas
should dread no peril, though he himself
should be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad,
‘thus reflecting, Krsna solicited a space of
twelve furlongs from the ocean, and there he
built the city of Dwaraka’, defended by high
ramparts, and beautified with gardens and
reservoirs of water, crowded with houses and
buildings, and splendid as the capital of Indra,
Amaravati. Thither Janarddana conducted the
inhabitants of Mathura, and then awaited at
that city the approach of Kalayavana.

बहिररावसिते सैन्ये मथुराया निरायुध:।
निर्घगाम स गोविन्दो ददृशे यवनेश्वरम्।। १६॥

स ज्ञात्वा वासुदेवं तं बाहुप्रहरणो नृप:।
अनुयातो महायोगि-चेतोभि: प्राप्यते न य:॥ १७॥
तेनानुयात: कृष्णोऽपि प्रविवेश महागुहाम्।

Oa शेते महावीर्यो मुचुकुंन्दो नरेश्वर:।। १८॥
सोऽपि प्रविश्य यवनो Gat शच्यागतं नृपम्।
पादेन ताडयामास मत्वा कृष्णं सुदुर्मति:।। १९॥
दृष्टमान्रस्तु मैत्रेय! भस्मीभूतश्च तत्क्षणात्।। २०॥
स हि देवासुरे युद्धे गतो जित्वा महासुरान्।
Fant: सुमहाकालं निद्रा वव्रे वरं TUT २१॥
प्रोक्तश्च दैवै: संसुप्तं यस्त्वामुत्थापयिघ्यति।
देहजेनाग्निना a: स तु भस्मीभविष्यति।। २ २॥

When the hostile army encamped round
Mathura Krsna unarmed went forth, and
beheld the Yavana king, K4layavana, the
strong-armed, recognizing Vasudeva, pursued
him; him whom the thoughts of perfect
ascetics connot overtake. Thus pursued, Krsna
