284

CHAPTER 16
षोडशोऽध्याय:
(arg मधुमांसादिदानफलस्य क्लीवादिद्वाराश्राद्धदर्शनदोषस्य
च वर्णनम्)

और्व उवाच
हविष्य-मत्स्य-मांसैस्तु शशस्य शकुनस्य च।
शौकरच्छागलैरैणैरौरवैर्गवयेन च।। १॥
औरभ्रगव्यैश्च तथा मासवृद्ध्या पितामहा:।
प्रयान्ति तृप्तिं मांसैस्तु fret वाध्रीणसामिषै:।। an
खड्गमांसमतीवात्र कालशाकं तथा मधु।
शस्तानि कर्मण्यत्यन्त-तृप्तिदानि AIT ३॥

Aurva continued—"Ancestors are satisfied
for a month with offerings of rice or other

THE VISNU-PURANAM

grain, with clarified butter,! with fish or the
flesh of the hare, of birds, of the hog, the goat,
the antelope, the deer, the gayal or the sheep
or with the milk of the cow and its products.’
They are forever satisfied with flesh (in
general) and with that of the long-eared white
goat in particular. The flesh of the rhinoceros,
the Kalasaka potherb and honey, are also
especial sources of satisfaction to those
worshipped at ancestral ceremonies.

गयामुपेत्य य: ares करोति पृथिवीपते।

सफलं तस्य तज्जन्म जायते पितृतुष्टिदम्॥४॥
प्रशान्तिका: सनीवारा: yararer द्विविधास्तथा।
वनौषधीप्रधानास्तु श्राद्धार्हा: पुरुषर्षभ।। ५॥
war: प्रियङ्गवो मुद्गा गोधूमा व्रीहयस्तिला:।
निष्पावा: कोविदाराश्च सर्षपाश्चात्र शोभना:।। ६)॥

The birth of that man is the occasion of
satisfaction to his progenitors who performs at
the due time their obsequial rites at Gaya.
Grains that spring up spontaneously, rice
growing wild, panic of both species (white or
black), vegetables that grow in forests, are fit
for ancestral oblations; as are barley, wheat,
rice, sesamum, various kinds of pulse and
mustard.

अकृताग्रयणं यच्च धान्यजातं नरेश्वर!
राजमाषानणूश्चैव मसूरांश्च विवर्जयेत्।७॥
weg गृञ्जनञ्चैव पलाण्डं पिण्डमूलकम्।
TR करम्भाणि लवणान्यौषराणि च।। ८।
amma निर्यासा: प्रत्यक्षलवणानि च।
वर्ज्यन्येतानि व श्राद्धे यच्च वाचा न शस्यते।।९॥
नक्ताहृतं न चोत्सृष्टं Tad न च यत्र गौ:;।
Sie फेनिलञ्चाम्बु seared न पाथिव॥ १०॥

On the other hand, a householder must not
offer any kind of grain that is not consecrated
by religious ceremonies on its first coming
into season; nor the pulse called Rajamdsa nor
millet nor lentils nor gourds nor garlic nor
onions nor nightshade nor camels' thorn nor
salt nor the efflorescence of salt deserts nor
red vegetable extracts nor anything that looks
