250

THE VISNU-PURANAM

दानं दद्यादू यजेद् देवान् UH: स्वाध्यायतत्पर:।
नित्योदकी wae विप्र: कुर्याचाग्निपरिग्रहम्।। २ २॥
वृत्त्यर्थं याजयेच्चान्यानन्यान् ध्यापयेत् तथा।

कुर्यात् प्रतिग्रहादानं गुर्वर्थं न्यायतो fest: 230

मैत्री समस्तभूतेषु ब्राह्मणस्योत्तमं धनम्।। २४॥

Ma रत्ने च पारक्ये समबुद्धिर्भवेद् द्विज:।

ऋतावभिगम: पत्नां शस्यते चास्य पाथिव।। २५॥

To which Aurva answered and said,
"Attentively listen to the duties which I shall
describe as those severally of the Brahmana,
the Ksatriya, the Vaisya and the Sidra. The
Brahmana should make gifts, should worship
the gods with sacrifices, should be assiduous
in studying the Vedas, should perform
ablutions and libations with water and should
preserve the sacred flame. For the sake of
subsistence he may offer sacrifice on behalf of
others and may instruct them in the Sastras;
and he may accept presents of a liberal
description in a becoming manner (or from
respectable persons and at an appropriate
season). He must ever seek to promote the
good of others and do evil unto none; for the
best riches of a Bradhmana are universal
benevolence. He should look upon the jewels
of another person as if they were pebbles; and
should, at proper periods, procreate offspring
by his wife. These are the duties of a
Brahmana.

यजेच्च विविधैर्यज्ञैरधीयीत च urea २६॥
शस्त्राजीवो महीरक्षा प्रवरा तस्य जीविका।
तस्यापि प्रथमे aed पृथिवीपरिपालनम्।। २७॥
धरित्रीपालनेयैव sean नराधिषा:।
भवन्ति-नृपतेरंशा यतो यज्ञादिकर्मणाम्॥ २८॥
दुष्टानां त्रासनाद् राजा शिष्टानां परिपालनात्।
प्राप्नोत्यभिमताँल्लोकान् वर्णसंस्थाकरो नृप:॥२९॥

"The man of the warrior tribe should
cheerfully “ give presents to Brahmanas,
perform various sacrifices and study the

scriptures. His especial sources of
maintenance are arms and the protection of the
earth. The guardianship of the earth is indeed
his especial province; by the discharge of this
duty a king attains his objects and realises a
share of the merit of all sacrificial rites. By
intimidating the bad and cherishing the good,
the monarch who maintains the discipline of
the different castes secures whatever rcgion he
desircs.
णिज्यं कपि Sart!

वैश्याय जीविकां ब्रह्मा ददौ लोकपितामह:। ३०॥

तस्याप्यध्ययनं यज्ञो दानं धर्मश्च शस्यते।

नित्यनैमित्तिकादीनामनुष्ठानञ्च कर्मणाम्।। ३ १॥

द्विजातिसंश्रयं कर्म तादर्थ्य तेन पोषणम्।

क्रयविक्रयजैर्वापि धनै: कारूद्धवेन वा॥३२॥

"Brahma, the great parent of creation, gave
to the Vaisya the occupations of commerce
and agriculture and the feeding of flocks and
herds, for his means of livelihood; and sacred
study, sacrifice and donations are also his
duties, as is the observance of fixed and
occasional rites.

(शूद्रस्य सन्नति: शौचं सेवा स्वामिन्यमायया।
अमन्त्रयज्ञो ह्यस्तेयं सत्सङ्गो विप्ररक्षणम्)॥ ३ ३॥
दानञ्च दद्याच्छूद्रोऽपि पाकयज्ञैर्यजेत च।
पित्र्यादिकञ्च aed ys: कुर्वीत तेन वै॥ ३४॥

"Attendance upon the three regenerate
castes is the province of the Sidra and by that
he is to subsist or by the profits of trade or the
earnings of mechanical labour. He is also to
make gifts; and he may offer the sacrifices in
which food is presented, as well as obsequial
offerings.’

भृत्यादिभरणार्थाय wees परिग्रह:।
ऋतुकालेऽभिगमनं स्वदारेषु महीपते।। ३५॥

दया समस्तभूतेषु तितिक्षानभिमानिता।

सत्यं शौचमनायासो मङ्गल्यं प्रियवादिता।। ३६॥
मैत्रस्पृहा तथा तद्वदकार्पण्यं नरेश्वर।

अनसूया च सामान्या वर्णानां कथिता गुणा:।॥३७॥
आश्रमाणाञ्च सर्वेषामेते सामान्यलक्षणा:।
