BOOK III, CHAP. 18

289

consist, yet we behold the world impressed by
the ignorance of unity, with the belief of its
separate existence. Engaged in the duties of
their respective orders and following the paths
prescribed by holy writ, practising also
religious penance, it is impossible, for us to
destroy them. Do you, whose wisdom is
immeasurable, instruct us in some device by
which we may be able to exterminate the
enemies of the gods."

WU उवाच
इत्युक्तो भगवांस्तेभ्यो मायामोहं शरीरत:।
तमुत्पाद्य ददौ विष्णु: wre चेदं सुरोत्तमान्।। ४१1

Parasara continued— “When the mighty Vis
nu heard their request, he emitted from his
body an illusory form, which he gave to the
gods and thus spoke” :

श्रीभगवानुवाच
मायामोहोऽयमखिलान् दैत्यांस्तान्मोहयिष्यति।
wat वध्या भविष्यन्ति वेदमार्गबहिष्कृता:। ४ २॥
स्थितौ स्थितस्य मे वध्या यावन्त: परिपन्थिन:।
ब्रह्मणो येऽधिकारस्य देवदैत्यादिका: सुरा:।।४३॥
AG गच्छत: न भी: कार्या मायामोहोऽयमग्रत:।
गच्छत्वद्योपकाराय भवता भवतां सुरा:।।४४॥

Visnu said~ "This deceptive vision shall
wholly beguile the Daityas, so that, being Icd
astray from the path of the Vedas, they may be
put to death; for all gods, demons or others,
who shall be opposed to the authority of the
Veda, shall perish by my might, while
exercised for the preservation of the world. Go
then and fear not; let this delusive vision
precede you; it shall this day be of great
service to you, oh gods!"

WII उवाच
मायामोहोऽपि तै: सार्द्ध ययौ यत्र महासुरा:।।४५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे सप्तदशोऽध्याय:॥ १७॥

Having thus spoken by Visnu, gods saluted
him and proceeded to that place wherefrom

they came. The deceptive vision also returned
with them.

EK
NOTES
1. This idea is expressed in nearly the same
terms in the Vayu p. ; सर्व्वषामेव भूतानां त्रयी संवरणं स्मृता।

परित्यजन्ति ये मोहात्ते वै नग्नादयो जना:॥ 'The three Vedas
are the covering of all beings and they who throw it
off through delusion are called Nagnas, naked.’ The
notion is probably original with neither of the
Puranas and the metaphorical sense of the term is
not that in which it was first employed; ascetics,
whether of the Bauddha or of the Digambara order
of Jains, being literally Nagnas or going naked. The
qualified application of it, however, was rendered
necessary by the same practice being familiar to
ascetics of the orthodox faith. To go naked was not
necessarily a sign of a heretic and therefore his
nudity was understood to be, rejecting the raiment
of holy writ. Thus the Vayu Purana extends the
word to all ascetics, including naked Brahmanas,
who practise austerities fruitlessly, that is,
heretically or hypocritically; ge दण्डी Jet मुण्डी वृथा
wag यो द्विज:। gen व्रती gen जापी ते वै नग्नादयो जना:॥ "The
Brahmana who unprofitably bears a staff, shaves
his head, goes naked, makes a vow or mutters
prayers, all such persons are called Nagnas and the
like."
2. A son of HiranyakaSipu (Bk. I. Ch. XV).
3. See Bk. 1. C. V.n. 5.
KKK
