206

THE VISNU-PURANAM

desire for heaven, the path pursued by acts of
devotion and the rest, and the worlds that are
their consequences, have been displayed to
you. In that universe which I have described,
he for ever migrates who is subject to the
influence of works; but he who knows
Vasudeva to be eternal, immutable, and of one
unchanging, universal form, may continue to
perform them,® as thereby he enters into the
deity.

NOTES

1. So is the car, according to the Vayu : अपां
गर्भसमुत्पन्नो रथ:। The orb of the moon, according to
the Linga, is only congealed water; घनतोयात्मकं 7a
मण्डल WR: स्मृतं। as that of the sun is concentrated
घनतेजोमयं TA मण्डल भास्करस्य च।

2. There is some indistinctness in this account,
from a confusion between the division of the
moon’s surface into sixteen Kalas or phases, and its
apportionment, as a receptacle of nectar, into
fifteen Kalas or digits, corresponding to the fifteen
lunations, on the fourteen of which, during the
wane, the gods drink the amrita, and on the
fifteenth of which the Pitrs exhaust the remaining
portion, The correspondence of the two distinctions
appcars to be intended by the text, which terms the
remaining digit or Kala, composed of Amrta, the
form or superficies of the two Kalas ; द्विकलाकारशिष्य
कला या सुधामृतमयी af पिवन्ति। This, the commentator
observes, is the fifteenth not the sixteenth : पंचदशी
कला या ot पितर: पिबन्ति न तु षीडशी। The commentator
on our text observes, also, that the passage is
sometimes read द्विलवाकारा Lava meaning ‘a
moment’, ‘a short period,’ The Matsya and Vayu
express the parallel passage so as to aviod all
perplexity, by specifying the two Kalas as referring
to time, and living the number of nectareous Kalas
undefined ; पिबन्ते द्विकलं कालं शिष्टास्तस्य कलास्तु या:।
‘They, the Pitrs, drink the remaining Kalas in two
Kalas to time,’ Warren explains Kala, or, as he
writes it, Cala, in one of its acceptations, ‘the
phases of the moon, of which the Hindus count
sixteen,’ Kala Sankalita, 359. So the Bhagavata the
moon स Vy षोडशकल: Geet wary and the Vayu,
aftcr noticing the exhaustion of the fifteenth portion
on the day of conjunction, states the recurrence of
increase or wane to take place in the sixteenth

phase at the beginning of each fortnight ; वृद्धिक्ष्दायौ 4
`पक्षादौ षौडश्यां शशिन: स्मृतौ।

3. The Vayu and Matsya add a fourth class, the
kavyas; identifying them with the cyclic years; the
Saumyas and Agnigvattas with the seasons; and the
Varhisads with the months.

4. The Vayu makes the horses ten in number,
each of a different colour.

5. The Matsya, Linga, and Vayu add the
circumstance of Rahu’s taking up, on these
occasions, the circular shadow of the earth : उद्धृत्य
पार्थिवीं orn निम्मितां मण्डलाकृति।

6. The different bands of air attached to Dhruva
are, according to the commentator, varieties of the
Pravaha wind; but the Ktrma and Linga enumerate
seven principal winds which perform this function
of which the Pravaha is one.

7. The four last are therefore stars in the circle of
perpetual appariation. One of these is the pole-star;
and in Kasyapa we have a verbal affinity to
Cassiopeia. The Sisumara, or porpoise, is rather a
singular symbol for the celestial sphere; but it is not
more preposterous than many of the constellations
of classical fiction. The component parts of it are
much more fully detailed in the Bhagavata, whence
it has been translated by Jones, As. Res. I. 402.
The Bhagavata, however, mystifies the description,
and says it is nothing more than the Dh&rana, or
symbol, by which Visnu, identified with the starry
firmament, is to be impressed upon the mind in
meditation. The account of the planetary system is,
as usual, fullest in the Vayu, with which the Linga
and Matsaya nearly agree. The Bhavisya is nearly,
also the same. They all contain many passages
common to them and to our text. In the Agni,
Padma, Ktrma, Brahma, Garuda, and V4mana
descriptions occur which enter into less detail than
the Visnu, and often use its words, or passages
found in other Puranas. Many intimations of a
similar system occur in the Vedas, but whether the
whole is to be found in those works is yet to be
ascertained. It must not be considered as a correct
representation of the philosophical astronomy of
the Hindus, being mixed up with, and deformed by,
mythological and symbolical fiction.

8. Only, however, as far as they are intended to
propitiate Visnu, and not for any other purpose.

. ह हे.।
