260

THE VISNU-PURANAM

who are my kindred and not my kindred and
who were my relations in a former life, all
who desire libations from me, receive
satisfaction from this water! May this water
and sesamum, presented by me, relieve the
hunger and thirst of all who are suffering from
those inflections, wheresoever they may be!”
Presentations of water, given in the manner,
oh king, which I have described, yield
gratification to all the world : and the sinless
man, who in the sincerity of faith pours out
these voluntary libations, obtains the merit that
results from affording nutriment to all
creatures.

आचम्य च ततो दद्यात् सूर्याय सलिलाञ्जलिम्।

नमो विवस्वते ब्रह्मन् wad विष्णुतेजसे।

जगत्सवित्रे yet सवित्रे कर्मदायिने।। ३९॥

जलाभिषेक-पुष्पाणां धूपादेश्च निवेदनै:।। ४०॥

"Having then rinsed his mouth, he is to
offer water to the sun, touching his forchead
with his hands joined and with this prayer;
‘Salutation to Vivasvat, the radiant, the glory
of Visnu; to the pure illuminator of the world;
to Savitri, the granter of the fruit of acts.' He is
then to perform the worship of the house,
presenting to his tutelary deity water, flowers
and incense,

अपूर्वमग्निहोत्रञ्च कुर्यात् प्राग् ब्रह्मणे नृप।

प्रजापतिं समुद्दिश्य दद्यादाहुतिमादरात्॥४१॥

गुह्येभ्य: कश्यपायाथ ततोऽनुमतये क्रमात्॥४२॥

तच्छेषं मणिकेऽद्भ्योऽथ पर्जन्याय क्षिपेत्तत:।

द्वारे धातुर्विधातुश्च wet च ब्राह्मण: क्षिपेत्।

गृहस्य पुरुषव्याघ्र! दिग्देवानपि मे शृणु।। ४३॥

He is next to offer oblations with fire, not

preceded by any. other rite, to Brahma.*

Having ,, invoked , Prajapati, det. him. pour
oblations reverently to, his household gods, to
residue of the’ 6blation’ let him ‘offer. 5 the
earth, to water and:to rain, in.a pitcher at hand;
and to Dhataé and Vidhata at the doors of his
house and in the middle of it to Brahma.

इन्द्राय धर्मराजाय वरुणाय तथेन्दवे।

प्राच्यादिषु बुधो दद्याद्धुतशेषात्मकं बलिम्॥ ४४॥
प्रागुत्तरे च दिग्भागे धन्वन्तरिबलिं बुध:।

निर्वषेदू वैश्वदेवञ्च कर्म कुर्यादत: परम्॥४५॥
वायव्ये वायवे दिक्षु समस्तासु ततो दिशाम्।
ब्रह्मणे चान्तरिक्षाय भानवे च feta बलिम्॥४६॥
विश्वेदेवान् विश्वभूतानथ विश्वपतीन् पितॄन्।
यक्षाणाञ्च समुद्दिश्य बलिं दद्यान्नरेश्चर॥ ४७॥

Let the wise man also offer the Bali,
consisting of the residue of the oblations, to
Indra, Yama, Varuna and Soma, at the four
cardinal points of his dwelling, the east an the
rest; and in the north-east quarter he will
present it to Dhanvantari.'° After having thus
worshipped the domestic deities, he will next
offer part of the residue to all the gods (the
Visvadevas); then, in the north-west quarter, to
Vayu (wind); then, in all directions, to the
points of the horizon, Brahma to the
atmosphere and to the sun; to all the gods, to
all beings, to the lords of beings, to the Pitrs,
to twilight.

त्ततोऽन्यदन्नमादाय भूमिभागे शुचौ बुध:।

दद्यादशेषभूतेभ्य: स्वेच्छया a समाहित:॥४८॥

प्रेता: पिशाचास्तरव: समस्ता

ये चान्नमिच्छन्ति मया प्रदत्तम्।४९॥
पिपीलिका: कोटपतड्गकाद्या

बुभुक्षिता: कर्मनिबन्धबद्धा:।
warg ते तृप्तिमिदं ware

तेभ्यो विसृष्टं सुखिनो भवन्तु।॥५०॥

Then taking other rice,'’ let the
householder at pleasure cast it upon a clean
spot of ground; as an offering to all beings,
repeating with collected ‘mind this prayer;
"May gods, men, animals, birds, saints, Yaks

as, serpents, demons, ghosts, goblins, trees, all
that desire food .given’ by me; may ants,
worms, moths and other.insects, hungered:-and
