132

THE VISNU-PURANAM

specifies only Puloma and Kalika as the daughters
of VaiSwdnara, as does our text. Upadanavi,
according to the Bhagavata. is the wife of
Hiranyaksa : and Hayasiras. of Kratu,

8. Though not specified by the text as one of the
Danavas, he is Included in the catalogue of the
Vayu, and the commentator on the Bhagavata calls
him a son of Danu.

9. The word is also read Kitlakas and Kalakeyas:
the Mahabharata, I. 643, has Kalakanjas.

10. The text omits the two most celebrated of the
Sainhikeyas, or sons of Sinhika. Rahu (sec ch. IX.
note 8.) and Ketu. who are specified both in the
Bhagavata and the Vayu, the former as the eldest
son. Of the other sons it is said by the Vayu that
they were all killed by Parasgurama.

11. Two names of note, found in the Vayu, are
omitted by the Visnu; that of Puloman. the father of
Sachi. the wife of Indra. and mother of Jayanta; and
May, the father of Vajrakama and Mahodari.

{2. The Bhagavata says the Paulomas were
killed by Arjuna. who therefore, the commentator
observes, were the same as the Nivata Kavachas :
but the Mahabharata describes the destruction of
the Nivata Kavachas and of the Paulomas and
Kalakeyas as the successive exploits of Arjuna.
Vana Purana 8. I. 633. The story is narrated of
detail only in the Mahabharata, which is
consequently prior to all the Puranas in which the
allusion occurs. According to that work, the Nivata
Kavachas were Danavas, to the number of thirty
millions, residing in the depths of the sea : and the
Paulomas and Kalakanjas were the children of.two
Daitya dames, Puloma and Kalaka, inhabiting
Hiranyapura, the golden city, floating in the air.

13. All the copies read Yat शुकानजनयदुलूकी
प्रत्युलूककान्। which should be, Saki bore parrots; and
Ulaki, the several sorts of owls :' but UIdki is
nowhere named as one of the daughters of Tamra,
and the reading may १९,उलूकप्रत्यलूककान्। ‘Owls and
birds opposed to owls, i. e, crows. The authorities
generally concur with our text; but the ‘Wayu has a
somewhat different account: or. Siki, married to
Garuda, the mother of parrots; : Syeni. married to
Aruna, mother of Sampati and Jatéyu : Bhasi, the
mothcr of jays, owls, crows, peacocks, pigeons, and
fowls : Kraufici, the parent of curlews, herons,
crancs : and Dhrtarastri, the mother of geese, ducks,

teal, and other water-fowl. The three last are also
called the wives of Garuda.

14. Most of the Puranas agree in this account:
but the Bhagavata makes Vinata the wife of Tarksa
and in this place substitutes Sarama, the mother of
wild animals. The Vayu adds the metres of the
Vedas as the daughters of Vinaté : and the Padma
gives her one daughter Sau-damini.

15. The dragons of modern fable. Anayusa or
Danayusa is substituted for Surasa in the Vayu, and
in onc of the accounts of the Padma. The
Bhagavata says Raksasas were her offspring. The
Matsya has both Surasé and Anayusa, making the
former the parent of all quadrupeds, except cows;
the latter, the mother of diseases.

16. The Vayu names forty ; the most noted
amongst whom, in addition to those of the text, are
Airavata, Dhrtarastra, Mahanila Balahaka. Afijana,
Puspadanstra, Durmukha, Kaliya, Pundarika,
Kapila. Nahuga, and Mani.

17. By Danstma (€:) some understand
serpents, some Réaksasas; but by .the context
carnivorous animals, birds, and fishes seem
intended, the Vayu makes Krodhavasa the mother
of twelve daughters, Mrgi and others, from whom
all wild animals, deer, elephants. monkeys, tigers,
lions, dogs. also fishes, reptiles, and Bhtitas and
Pisdchas, or goblins, sprang.

18. One copy only inserts a half stanza here;
"Krodha was the mother of the Pisachas;" which is
an interpolation apparently from the Mataya or Hari
Varhsa. The Padma Purana. second legend, makes
Krodha the mother of the Bhitas; and Pisaca, of the
Pisacas.

19. The Bhagavata says, of animals with cloven
hoofs. -The Vayu has, of the eleven Rudras. of the
bull of Siva, and of two daughters, Rohini and
Gandharbi: from the former of whom descended
horned cattle; and from the latter, horses.

20. According to the Vayu, Khasa had two sons,
Yaksa and Raksas. severally the progenitors of
those beings.

21. The Padma, second series, makes Vach the
mother of both Apsarasas and Gandharvas: the
Vayu has fong lists of the names of both classes, as
well as of Vidyadharas and Kinnaras. The Apsaraas
are distinguished as of two kinds, Laukika,
‘worldly,’ of whom thirty-four are specified; and
Daivika, or ‘divine.’ ten in number : the latter
