330

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Ambarisa Kalmasapada
Sindhudvipa
Ayutasva
Rituparna
Sarvakaéma
Sudasa
Kalmasapada

The entire Pauranik series comprises twenty
descents and that of the Ramayana sixteen. Some of
the last names of the poem occur amongst the first
of thosc of the Puranas, but there is an
irreconcilable difference in much of the
nomenclature. The Agni, under the particular
account of the descent of Rama, has for his
immediate predecessors Raghu, Aja, Dasaratha, as
in our text; and the author of the Raghu Varhsa
agrees with the Puranas from Dilipa downwards.

16. This is an epitome of the Ramayana, the
heroic poem of Valmiki, on the subject of Rama's
exploits. A part of the Ramayana was published,
with a translation by Carey and Marshman, several
years since; but much more correct edition of the
text of the two first books, with a Latin translation
of the first and part of the second, have been more
recently published by Professor Schlegel; a work
worthy of his illustrious name. A summary of the
story may be found in Jones’ Works, Maurice's
Hindustan, Moor's Pantheon. It is also the subject
of the Uttara Rama Carita in the Hindu Theatre, in
the introduction to which an outline of the whole is
given. The story is therefore, no doubt, sufficiently
familiar even to English readers. It seems to be
founded on historical fact; and the traditions of the
south of Indian uniformly ascribe its civilisation,
the subjugation or dispersion of its forest tribes of
barbarians and the settlement of civilised Hindus, to
the conquest of Lanka by Rama.

17. The Vayu specifies the countries or cities
over which they reigned Angada and Citraketu, as
the Vayu terms the latter, governed countries near
the Himilayas, the capitals of which were Angadi
and Candravaktra. Taksa and Puskara were
sovereigns of Gandh4ra, residing at Taksasila and
Puskaravati. Subahu and Sirasena reigned at
Mathura; and in the latter we might be satisfied to
find the Sirasenas of Arrian, but that there is a
subsequent origin, of perhaps greater authenticity,
in the family of Yadu, as we shall hereafter see.
’Kusa built Kugasthal? on the brow of the Vindhya,

the capital of Kosala; and Lava reigned at Sravasti
(see Bk. IV. Chs. I and II) in Uttara (northern)
Kogalav:' कुशस्य कोशला wee Wear कुशस्थली रम्या
Raia विन्ध्यपर्व्वतसानुषु। उत्तरकोशले राज्यं लवस्य च
महात्मन:। श्रावस्ती लोकविख्याता। The Raghu Varga
describes Kuga at returning from Kusavati to
Ayodhya, after his father's death; but it seems not
unlikely that the extending power of the princes of
the Doab, of the lunar family, compelled Rama's
posterity to retire more to the west and south.

18. The Bhagavata is the only Purana that omits
this name, as if the author had been induced to
correct the reading in order to avoid the necessity
of recognising two Nalas. See above, n.9.

19. Here again we have two distinct series of
princes, independently of variations of individual
names. Instead of the list of the text, with which the
Vayu and Bhagavata nearly and the Brahma and
Hari Varhsa indifferently conform, we have in the
Matsya, Lifiga, Kirma and Agni the following ;
Ahinagu, Sahasrasva, Sahasraya or Sahasrabala,
Candravaloka, Tarapida or Taraidhiga, Candgragiri,
Bhaniratha or Bhanumitra and Sritayus, with
whom the list ends, except in the Linga, which adds
Bahula, killed by Abhimanyu enumerating
therefore from Devanika but seven or eight princes
to the great war, instead of twenty-three, as in the
other series. The Raghu Varnsa gives much the
same list as our text, ending with Agnivarna.

20. Bala : Bhagavata Nala : Hari Varhsa.

21. Sthala : Bhagavata, Sala ; Vayu and Brahma.
Sila ; Raghu Varga.

22. Omitted : Bhagavata.

23. Sankha : Brahma. Khagana : Bhag.

24. Disitagva : Vayu. Adhyisitasva : Brahma.
Vidhriti ; Bhagavata.

25. Omitted : Braluma and Bhagavata.

26. Omitted : Brahma and Hari Varhsa : but
included with similar particulars by the Vayu,
Bhagavata and Raghu Varhsa : see also Bk. II]. Ch.
VI, where Kausalya is likewise given as the
synonym of Hiranyagarbha, being, as the
commentator observes, his Visesanam, his epithet
or attribute, born in or king of Kosalé. The. Vayu
accordingly terms him, हिरण्यनाभ: :। but in the
Bhagavata the epithet Kausalya is referred by the
commentator to Ydajfiavalkya, the pupil of
Hiranyanabha Wa: सकाशात् कौशल्यो
योगमध्यगात्। The author of the Raghu Varnga, not
