BOOK IV, 7

339

and Hari VarhsSa give a grosser name to the
effusion.

2. ‘He who knows’. Much erroneous speculation
has originated in confounding this Budha, the son
of Soma and regent of the planet Mercury, ‘he who
knows,' the intelligent, with Buddha, any deified
mortal, or ‘he by whom truth is known;' or, as
individually applicable, Gautama or Sakya, son of
Raja Suddhodana, by whom the Buddhists
themselves aver their doctrines were first
promulgated. The two characters have nothing in
common and the names are identical only when one
or other is misspelt.

3. The story of Puriravas is told much in the
same strain as follows, though with some variations
and in greater or less detail, in the Vayu, Matsya,
Vamana, Padma and Bhagavata Puranas. It is also
referred to in the Mahabharata, vol. I. p. 113. It is
likewise, the subject of the Vikrama and Urvasi of
Kalidasa, in which drania the incidents offensive to
good taste are not noticed. See Hindu Theatre, vol.
I. p. 187. The Matsya Purana, besides this story,
which is translated in the introduction to the drama,
has in another part, c. 94, an account of a
Puriravas, who, in the Caksusa Manvantara, was
king of Madra and who by the worship of Visnu
obtained a residence with the Gandharvas.

4. One copy has sixty-one years; the Brahma
Purana and Hari VarnSa have fifty-nine : one period
is as likely as the other.

5. It does not appear why this passage is
repeated. The length of the sticks, conformably to
the number of syllables in the usual form of the
Gayatri, would be twenty-four inches. The
Bhagavata attaches to the operation a piece of
mysticism of a Tantrika origin ; Purtravas, while
performing the attrition, mentally identifies himself
and Urvasi with the two sticks and repeats the
mantra, उर्व्वश्या मुरसि पुरूरवा:।

6. The division of one fire into three is ascribed
to Puriravas by the Mahabharata and the rest. The
commentator on the former specifies them as the
Garhapatya, Daksina and Ahavaniya, which Jones,
Manu. II. 231, renders nuptial, ceremonial and
sacrificial fires; or rather, 1. Household, that which
is perpetually maintained by a house-holder; 2. A
fire for sacrifices, placed to the south of the rest;
and 3. A consecrated fire for oblations; ferming the
Tretagni or triad of sacred fires, in oppositicn to the
Laukika or merely temporal ones. To Puriravas it
would appear the triple arrangement was owing;

but there are some other curious traditions
regarding him, which indicate his being the author
of some important innovations in the Hindu ritual.
The Bhagavata says, that before his time there was
but one Veda, one caste, one fire and one god,
Narayana; and that, in the beginning of the Treta
age, Purtiravas made them all 'three:' Teta

वेत्ता मुखे। that is, according to the commentator, the
ritual was then instituted ; कर्म्ममार्ग: Weel बभूव। The
Matsya Purana has an account of this prince's going
to the orbit of the sun and moon at every
conjunction, when oblations to progenitors are to
be offered, as if obsequial rites had originated with
Purtiravas. The Mahabharata states some still more
remarkable particulars. ‘The glorious Purtravas,
endowed, although a mortal, with the properties of
a deity, governing the thirteen islands of the ocean,
engaged in hostilities with the Brahmanas in the
pride of his strength and seized their jewels, as they
exclaimed against his oppression. Sanatkumara
came from the sphere of Brahma to teach him the
rules of duty, but Purtiravas did uot accept his
instructions and the king, deprived of
understanding by the pride of his power and
actuated by avarice, was therefore ever accursed by
the offended great sages and was destroyed.' fa: 4

विग्रहं wR च विप्राणां
ब्रह्मलोकादुपेत्य च। अनुदर्शं

क : शप्नो
व्यनश्यत। लोभान्वितो वलमदान्नष्टसज्ञो नराधिप:॥

KEK
