BOOK V, CHAP. 32

501

प्रद्युम्नादनिरुद्धोऽभूद् वज्रस्तस्मादजायत।। ६॥
अनिरुद्धो रणे रुद्धो बले: पौत्रीं महाबल:।
वाणस्य तनयामूषामुपयेमे द्विजोत्तम॥७॥

यत्र युद्धमभूद् घोरं हरि-शङ्करयोमडहत्।

fou सहस्रं TET यत्र वाणस्य चक्रिणा॥ CII

ParaSara said— I have enumerated to you
Pradyumna and the other sons of Rukmini.
Satyabhama bore Bhanu and Bhairika. The
sons Of Rohini were Diptimat, Témrapaksi,
and others. The powerful Samba and other
sons were bom of Jambavati. Bhadravinda and
other valiant youths were the sons of Nagnajiti
Saivya (or Mitra-vinda) had several sons, of
whom Sangramajit was the chief. Vrka and
others were begotten by Hari on Madri Laks
mana had Gatravat and others: and Sruta and
others were the sons of Kalindi.' Krsna had
sons also by his other wives, in all one
hundred and eighty thousand. The eldest of,
the whole was Pradyumna, the son of
Rukmini: his son was Aniruddha, from whom
Vraja was born: his mother was Usa, the
daughter of Bana, and grand-daughter of Bali,
whom. Aniruddha won in war. On_ that
occasion a fierce battle took place between
Hari and Sankara, in which the thousand arms
of Bana were lopped away by the discus of the
former.

भैत्रेय उवाच

कथं युद्धमभूद् ब्रह्मन्नूषार्थे हर-कृष्णयो:।

कथं क्षयञ्च AUT. बाहूनां कृतवान् STV

एतत् सर्वं महाभाग! समाख्यातुं त्वमर्हसि।

भहत् कौतूहलं जातं कथां श्रोतुमिमां Bt: go

Maitreya said How happened it,
venerable Brahman, that a contest on account
of Usd arose between Siva and Krsna ? and in
what manner did Hari cut off the thousand
arms of Bana ? This, illustrious sir; you are
able to narrate.

WIS उवाच

ऊषा वाणसुता विप्र! पार्वती सह शम्भुना।

क्रीडन्तीमुपलक्ष्योच्चै: स्पृहाञ्चक्रे तदाश्रयाम्॥ ११॥

तत: सकलचित्तज्ञा गौरी तामाह भामिनीम्।

अलमत्यर्थतापेन Wat त्वमपि रंस्यसे। १२॥

इत्युक्ते सा तदा चक्रे कदेति मतिमात्मन:।

को वा vat ममेत्येतां पुनरप्याह पार्व्वती॥१३॥

Parasara said— Usa the daughter of Bana,
having seen Parvati sporting with her lord,
Sambhu, was inspired with a wish for similar
dalliance. The beautiful Gauri, who knows the
hearts of all, said to Usa, "Do not grieve; you
shall have a husband.” “But when will this
be?” Thought Us to herself, “or who will be
my lord?" On which Parvati continued;

वैशाखशुकुद्वादश्यां स्वपने योऽभिभवं तव।
करिष्यति स ते wat राजपुत्रि! भविष्यति nex
"He who shall appear to you, princess, in a
dream on the twelfth lunation of the light half
of Vaisakha, he will be your husband.”
पराशर Saray
तस्यां तिथौ पुमान् स्वपने यथा देव्या उदीरितम्।
तथैवाभिभवं चक्रे रागञ्चक्रे तथैव सा।। १५॥
तत: MUST पुरुषमपश्यन्ती तमुत्सुका।
wa गतोऽसीति Fete मैत्रेयोक्तवती सखीम्।। १६॥
Accordingly, as the goddess had foretold,
on that lunar day a youth appeared to Usa in a
dream, of whose person she became
enamoured. When she woke, and no longer
perceived him, she was overcome with sorrow,
and, unrestrained by modesty, demanded of
her companion, whither he had gone.

वाणस्य मन्त्री कुम्भाण्डश्चित्रलेखा तु तत्सुता।

तस्या: सख्यभवद् सा च We कोऽयं AAAI १७॥
यदा लज्जाकुला नास्यै कथयामास सा सती।

तदा विश्वासमानीय सर्वमेवाभ्यवादयत्।। १८॥
विदितार्थान्तु तामाह पुनरूषा यथोदितम्।

देव्या तथैव ASA योऽभ्युपाय: कुरुष्व तम्॥ १९॥
