192

THE VISNU-PURANAM

sky, north of the sun, until the destruction of
the universe: they enjoy immortality, for that
they are holy; exempt from covetousness and
concupiscence, love and hatred; taking no part
in the procreation of living beings, and
detecting the unreality of the properties of
elementary matter. By immortality is meant
existence to the end of the Kalpa: life as long
as the three regions (earth, sky, and heaven)
last is called exemption from (reiterated)
death.* The consequences of acts of iniquity
or piety, such as Brahmanicide or an
Asvamedha, endure for a similar period, or
until the end of a Kalpa,” when all within the
interval between Dhruva and the earth is
destroyed.

sahrghinag gat यत्र व्यवस्थित:।

wag विष्णुपदं दिव्यं तृतीयं व्योम्नि भास्वरम्।।९३॥

स्थानं तत् परमं विप्र पुण्यपापरिक्षये।। १४॥

अपुण्यपुण्योपरमे क्षीणाशेषार्तिहेतव:। .

यत्र गत्वा न शोचन्ति तद् विष्णो: परमं पदम्।।१५॥

धर्म्मध्नुवाद्यास्तिष्ठन्ति यत्र ते लोकसाक्षिण:।

तत्साङ्ख्योत्पन्नयोगेऽङ्गस्तद्विष्णो: परमं पदम्।। ९६॥

यत्रोतमेतत् प्रोतञ्च यद्भूतं सचराचरम्।

भव्यञ्च fad tra aq विष्णो: परमं पदम्।९७॥

दिवीव चक्षुराततं योगिनां तन्मयात्मनाम्।

विवेकज्ञानदृष्टञ्च तद् विष्णो: wet पदम्॥९८॥

यस्मिन् प्रतिष्ठितो भास्वान् मेधीभूत: स्वयं gas

ga च सर्वज्योतींषि ज्योति:ष्वम्भोमुचो fier ९९॥

मेघेषु सन्तता वृष्टिर्वृष्टेश्चापोऽथ पोषणम्।

आप्यायनञ्च सर्वेषां देवादीनां महामुने। १० ०॥

ततश्चाज्याहुतिद्वारा पोषितास्ते हविर्भुज:।

वृष्टे:कारणतां यान्ति भूतानां स्थितये पुन:।। १० Ut

The space between the seven Rsis and

Dhruva,” the third region of the sky, is the
splendid celestial path of Visnu (Visnupada),
and the abode of those sanctified ascetics who

are cleansed from every soil, and in whom
virtue and vice are annihilated. This is that

excellent place of Visnu to which those repair
in whom all sources of pain are extinct, in
consequence of the cessation of the
consequences of piety or iniquity, and where
they never sorrow more. There abide Dharma,
Dhruva, and other spectators of the world,
radiant with the superhuman faculties of Vis
nu, acquired through religious meditation; and
there are fastened and inwoven to all that is,
and all that shall ever be, animate or
inanimate. The seat of Visnu is contemplated
by the wisdom of the Yogis, identified with
supreme light, as the radiant eye of heaven. In
this portion of the heavens of splendid Dhruva
is stationed, and serves for the pivot of the
atmosphere. On Dhruva rest the seven great
planets, and on them depend the clouds. The
rains are suspended in the clouds, and from the
rains come the water which is the nutriment
and delight of all, the gods and the rest; and
they, the gods, who are the receivers of
oblations, being nourished by burnt offsprings,
cause the rain to fall for the support of created
beings. This sacred station of Visnu, therefore,
is the support of the three worlds, as it is the
source of rain.

एवमेतत् पदं विष्णोस्तृतीयममलात्मकम्।
आधारभूतं लोकानां त्रयाणां वृष्टिकारणम्॥ १० २॥
Wa: Ward Tay सर्वपापहरा सरित्।

गङ्गा देवाङ्गनाङ्गानामनुलेपनपिञ्जरा।। १० ३॥

वामपादाम्बुजाङ्गुष्ठनखस्रोतोविनिर्गता।

विष्णोर्बिभर्ति यां भक्त्या शिरसाऽहर्निशं ध्रुव:।। १० ४॥]
तत: सप्तर्षयो यस्या: प्राणायामपरायणा:।

तिष्ठन्ति वीचिमालाभिरुह्यमानजटा etn १० ५॥
ara: सन्ततैर्यस्या: प्लावितं शशिमण्डलम्।
भूयोऽधिकतमां कान्ति वहत्येतदुपक्षयम्।। १०६॥
मेरुपृष्ठे पतत्युच्चैर्निष्कान्ता शशिमण्डलात्।

जगत: पवनार्थाय या प्रयाति चतुर्दिशम।। १०७॥

सीता चालकनन्दा च चक्षुर्भद्रा च संस्थिता।

एकैव या चतुर्भेदा दिग्भेदगतिलक्षणा॥ १० ८॥

झे-ञ्चालकनन्दाख्यं यस्या: सर्वोऽपि दक्षिणम्।
