BOOK VI, CHAP. 7

559

त्रिभावभावनातीतो मुक्तये योगिनां नृप४७५॥

This form of the universal form is to be

meditated upon by the sage for the object of the lobes

purification, as it destroys all sin. In the same
manner as fire, blazing in the wind, burns dry
grass, so Visnu, seated in the heart, consumes
the sins of the sage; and therefore let him
resolutely effect the fixation of his mind upon
that receptacle of all the three energies (Vis
nu), for that is the operation of the mind which
is called perfect Dharana: and thus the
perfect asylum of individual as well as
universal spirit, that which is beyond the three
modes of apprehension, is attained, for the
eternal emancipation of the sage.

अन्ये च पुरुषव्याघ्र! चेतसो ये व्यपाश्रया:।

अशुद्धास्ते समस्तास्तु देवाद्या: कर्मयोनय:॥७६॥
भूर्त्त भगवतो रूपं सर्वापाश्रयनि:स्पृहम्।

wer वै धारणा Har यच्चितं तत्र ara won
aa मूर्त्त हरॆ रूपं mem fad नराधिप:।
तच्छूयतामनाधारे धारणा नोपपद्यते।७ ८॥

The minds of other beings, which are not
fixed upon that asylum, are altogether impure,
and are all the gods and the rest, who spring
from acts, The retention or apprehension by
the mind of that visible form of Visnu, without
regard to subsidiary forms, is thence called
Dharana; and I will describe to you the
perceptible form of Hari, which no mental
retention will manifest, except in a mind that
is fit to become the receptacle of the idea.'*

प्रसन्नचारुवदनं पदापत्रोपमेक्षणम्।

सुकपोलं सुविस्तीर्णललाटफलकोज्ज्वलम्॥७९॥
समकर्णान्तविन्यस्य-चारुकर्णविभूषणम्।

कम्बुग्रीवं सुविस्तीर्ण-श्रीवत्साङ्कितवक्षसम्॥ ¢ 0 tt
बलीत्रिभट्गिना मग्नाभिना चोदरेण वै।
प्रलम्बाष्टभुजं विष्णुमथवापि चतुर्भुजम्॥ ८ en
समस्थितोरुजङ्घञ्च सुस्थिराड्घ्रवराम्बुजम्।

The meditating sage must think (he beholds

internally the figure) of Visnu as having a
pleased and lovely countenance, with eyes like

the leaf of the lotus, smooth cheeks, and a
broad and brilliant forehead; ears of equal size,
of which are decorated with splendid
pendants; a painted neck, and a broad breast,
on which shines the Srivatsa mark; a belly
falling in graceful folds, with a deep-seated
navel; eight long arms, or else four; and firm
and well-knit thighs and legs, with well-
formed feet and toes.

forte war मूर्त्तस्य पीतनिर्मलवाससम्॥ ८ २॥

किरीटचारुकेयूर-कटकादिविभूषितम्।

शार्ङ्ग-शङ्ख-गदा-खड्ग-चक्राक्षवलयान्वितम्॥ ८ ३॥

Let him, with well-governed thoughts,
contemplate, as long as he can persevere in
unremitting attention, Hari as clad in a yellow
robe, wearing a rich diadem on his head, and
brilliant armlets and bracelets on his arms, and
bearing in his hands the bow, the shell, the
mace, the sword, the discus, the rosary, the
lotus, and the arrow”.

चिन्तयेत् तन्मना योगी समाधायात्ममानसम्।

तावदू wag दृढीभूता तत्रैव FI! धारणा॥ ८४॥
व्रजतस्तिष्ठतोऽन्यद् वा स्वेच्छया at कुर्वत:।
नापयाति यदा चित्तात् सिद्धां मन्येत तां rene qt
aa: शङ्ख-गदा-चक्र-शार्ङ्गदिरहितं बुध:।
चिन्तयेद्भगवद्रूपं प्रशान्तं साक्षसूत्रकम्।॥ ८ ६॥

When this image never departs from his
mind, whether he be going or standing, or be
engaged in any other voluntary act, then he
may believe his retention to be perfect. The
sage may then meditate upon the form of Vis
nu without his arms, as the shell, mace, discus,
and bow; and as placid, and bearing only his
rosary.

सा यदा धारणा तद्ददवस्थानवती तत:।
किरीट-केयूरमुखैर्भूषणै रहितं wT cen
तदेकावयवं देवं चेतसा fe पुनर्बुध:।
कुर्यात्ततोऽवयविनि प्रणिधानपरो भवेत्॥ ८८॥
तदूपप्रत्ययायैका सन्ततिश्चान्यनि:स्पृहा।
तद्ध्यानं प्रथमैरज्ञै: षड्भिर्निष्पाद्यते yous eu
त्तस्यैव कल्पनाहीनं स्वरूपप्रहणं हि यत्।
