BOOK V, CHAP. 2

419

from cause, nor from’’ cause and no cause.’ The
term ‘no cause’ may, the commentator says
designate fixed prescribed duties, the Nityakarma;
‘cause’ may signify occasional sacrifices, the
Kamya-karma : neither of these can form any
neccssity for Visnu’s descent, as they might of a
mere mortal’s being born on the earth : or Karana is
explained to mean ‘obtaining pleasure,’ from Ka
(क) and Arana (am), ‘obtaining: ` obtaining
happiness or the cause of it, piety, virtue (a=); and
with the negative, Akarana (अकारणं), the reverse,
pain, the consequence of wickedness (अधर्म्म:). The
purport is clear enough, is merely meant to state
that Visnu is not subject to the necessity which is
the cause of human birth.

22. The term Pradhana, which is repeated in this
passage, is explained in the second place to mean
Puman, ‘soul' or ‘spirit ;* प्रधानबुद्धीन्द्रियवत् प्रधानमूलापरात्मन्।

23, The same account of the origin of Krsna is
given in the Mahabharata, Adi Parva vol. L. p. 266.
The white hair is impersonated as Balarima; the
black, as Krsna. The commentator on our text
maintains that this is not to be literally understood :
‘Visnu did not intend that the two hairs should
become incarnate, but he meant to signify, that,
should he send them, they would be more than
sufficient to destroy Karnsa and his demons : or the
birth of Rama and Krsna was a double illusion,
typified by the two hairs.’ This scems to be a
refinement upon an older and somewhat
undignified account of the origin of Krsna and his
brothcr. The commentator on the Mahabhara...
argues that they are to be understood merely as the
media by which Devaki and Rohini conceived.

24. Yoganidra (योगनिद्रा) is the sleep of devotion or
abstraction, the active principle of illusion,
personified and also termed Maya and Mahamaya,
also Avidya or ignorance. In the Durga Mahatmya
of the Markandeya Purana she appears as Devi or
Durga, the Sakti or bride of Siva; but in our text as
Vaisnavi or the Sakti of Visnu.

25. Allusion is here made to the exploits of
Durga, as celebrated especially in the Durga
Mahitmya : and it must be posterior to the date of
that or same similar composition. The passage may
be an interpolation, as the Markandeya Purana in
genera! has the appearance of being a more recent
compilation than the Visnu.

26. This refers to the Pitha sthanas, ‘fifty-one
places’, where, according to the Tantras, the limbs
of Sati fell, when scattered by her husband Siva, as
he bore her dead body about and tore it to pieces,
after she had put an end to her existence at Daksa’s
sacrifice. This part of the legend scems to be an
addition to the original fable made by the Tantras,
as it is not in the Puranas (see the story of Daksa’s
sacrifice). It bears some analogy to the Egyptian
fable of Isis and Osiris. At the Pitha sthdnas,
however, of Jvalamukhi, Vindhyavasini, Kalighat
and others, temples are erected to the different
forms of Devi or Sati, not to the phallic emblem of
Mahadeva, which, if present, is there as an
accessory and embellishment, not as a principal and
the chief object of worship is a figure of the
goddess; a circumstance in which there is an
essential difference between the temples of Durga
and shrines of Osiris.

EK
