84

their affections he derived the tide of Raja or
king’. The waters became solid, when he
traversed the ocean: the mountains opened him
a path; his banner passed unbroken (through
the-forests): the earth needed not cultivation;
and at a thought food was prepared: all kine
were like the cow of plenty: honey was stored
in every Bower, At the sacrifice of the birth of
Prthu, which was performed by Brahma, the
intelligent Stta therald or bard) was produced,
in the juice of the monoplant, on the very
birth-day’: at that great sacrifice also was
produced the accomplished Magadha: and the
holy sages said to these two persons, "Praise
ye the king Prthu, the illustrious son of Vena;
for this is your especial function, and here is a
fit subject for your praise.” But they
respectfully replied to the Brahmanas. “We
know not the acts of the new-born king of the
earth; his merits are not understood by us; his
fame is not spread abroad: inform us upon
what subject we may dilate in his praise.”

ऋषय AW:
करिष्यत्येष aq कर्म चक्रवर्ती महाबल:।
गुणा भविष्या ये चास्य a स्तूयतां FTG aM
“Praise the king.” said the Rsis, “for the

acts this heroic monarch will perform; praise
him for the virtues he will display.”

WUT उवाच
तत: स नृपतिस्तोषं तछ्रुत्वा परमं ययौ।
सद्गुणै: एलाघ्यतामेति स्तव्याश्चाभ्यां गुणा मम।।५६॥
तस्माद् यदद्य स्तोत्रेण गुणनिर्वर्णनं त्विमौ।
करिष्येते करिष्यामि तदेवाहं समाहित:॥ ५७॥
यदिमौ वर्जनीयञ्च किञ्चिदत्र वदिष्यत:।
तदहं वर्जयिष्यामीत्येवञ्चक्रे att FING ८॥
अथ तौ चक्रतु: स्तोत्रं पृथोर्वैण्यस्य धीमत:।
भविष्यै: कर्मभि: सम्यक् सुस्वरौ सूतमागघौ।। ५९॥

ParéSara said- The king, hearing these
words, was much pleased, and reflected that
persons acquire commendation by virtuous
actions, and that consequently his virtuous

THE VISNU-PURANAM

conduct would be the theme of the eulogium
which the bards were about to pronounce:
whatever merits, then, they should panegyrize
in their encomium, he determined that he
would endeavour to acquire; and if they should
point out what faults; ought to be avoided, he
would try to shun them. He therefore listened
attentively, as the sweet-voieed encomiasts
eelebrated the future virtues of Prthu, the
enlightened son of Vena.

सत्यवाग् दामशीलोऽयं VAAN नरेश्वर:।

ह्रीमान् मैत्र: क्षमाशीलो विक्रान्तो दुष्टशासन:। oft
धर्मज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च दयावान् प्रियभाषक:।
मान्यमानयिता यज्वा ब्रह्मण्य: साधुसम्मत:॥ ६ १॥
aa: शत्रौ च fax च व्यवहारे स्थितो नृप:।

The king is a speaker of truth, bounteous,
an observer of His promises; he is wise,
benevolent, patient, valiant, and a terror to the
wicked; he knows his duties; he acknowledges
services; he is compassionate and kind-
spoken; he respects the venerable; he performs
sacrifices; he reverences the Brahmans; he
cherishes the good; and in administering
justice is indifferent to friend or foe.

सूतेनोक्तेन TOP स तदा मागधेन च।। ६२॥
war ee तादृक च कर्मणा कृतवानसौ।

aa: स पृथिवीपाल: पालयन् वसुधामिमाम्॥ ६३॥
इयाज विविधैर्यज्ञैर्महद्भिभूरिदक्षिणै:।

तं wor: पृथ्वीनाथमुपतस्थु: क्षुधार्दिता:।। ६४॥
ओषधीषु प्रणष्टासु तस्मिन् काले ह्यराजके।

तमूचुस्तेन ता: पृष्टास्तत्रागमनकारणम्। ६५॥

The virtues thus celebrated by the Stta and
the Magadha were cherished in _ the
remembrance of the Raja, and praetised by
him when occasion arose. Protecting this
earth, the monarch performed many great
sacrificial ceremonies, accompanied by liberal
donations. His subjeets soon approached him,
suffering from the famine by which they were
afflieted, as all the edible plants had perished
during the season of anarchy. In reply to his
question of the cause of their coming, they
