218

Rbhu said— ‘None of these do I like; give
me rice boiled with sugar, wheaten cakes, and
milk with curds and molasses.’

निदाघ sara

हे हे शालिनि मद्गेहे यत् किञ्चिदतिशोभनम्।
भक्ष्योपसाधनं YS त्तेनास्यान्नं प्रसाधय। १४॥
Nidagha ऽक्षत-- ‘Ho dame, be quick and
prepare whatever is most delicate and sweet in
the house, to feed our guest.’

ब्राह्मण उवाच

इत्युक्ता तेन सा पत्नी मृष्टमन्नं द्विजस्य aq

प्रसाधितवती ae वै भर्तुर्वचनगौरवात्।। १५॥

तं भुक्तवन्तमिच्छातो मृष्टमन्नं महामुनिम्।

निदाघ: wre भूपाल! प्रश्रयावनत: स्थित:। १६॥

Having thus spoken, the wife of Nidagha,

in obedience to her husband’s commands,
prepared sweet and savoury food, and set it
before the Brahmana; and Nidagha, having
stood before him until he had eaten of the
meal which he had desired, thus reverentially
addressed him :

निदाघ sara
अपि & षरमा तृप्तिरुत्पन्ना तुष्टिरेव च।
अपि ते मानसं स्वसथमाहारेण कृतं द्विज॥ १७॥
क्व निवासो wary विप्र। क्व च गन्तुं समुद्यत:।
आगमन्यते च भवता यतस्तच्च द्विजोच्यताम्॥ १८॥

Nidaégha said—- ‘Have you _ eaten
sufficiently, and with pleasure, great
Brahmana? and has your mind received
contentment from your food? Where is your
present residence? whither do you purpose
going? and whence, holy sir, have you now
come?

कऋभुरुवाच

क्षुदू यस्य तस्य भुक्तेऽन्ने तृप्तिर्ब्रह्मण! जायते।

न मे क्षुन्नाभवत् तृप्ति: कस्मान्मां परिपृच्छसि।। १९॥
वह्निना पार्थिवे धातौ क्षयिते क्षुत्समुद्भव:।
भवत्यम्भसि च क्षीणे yor geht wad २०॥
क्षुत्तृषौ देहधर्माख्ये न ममैते यतो द्विज।

THE VISNU-PURANAM

तत: क्षुत्सम्भवाभावात् तृप्तिरस्त्येव मे सदा।। २१॥
मनस: स्वस्थता तुष्टिश्चित्तधर्माविमौ fan
चेतसो यस्य तत् पृच्छ पुमानेभिर्न युज्यते।। २२॥

क्व निवासस्तवेत्युक्तं क्व गन्तासि स यत् त्वया।

कुतश्चागम्यते तत्र त्रितयेऽपि Frater मे॥२३॥

पुमान् सर्वगतो व्यापी आकाशवदयं यत:।

कुत: कुत्र Fa गन्तासीत्येतदप्यर्थवत् कथम्।। २४॥

Rbhu said—- ‘A hungry man, Brahmana,

must needs be satisfied when he has finished
his meal. Why should you inquire if my
hunger has been appeased? When the earthy
element is parched by fire, then hunger is
engendered; and ‘thirst is produced when the
moisture of the body has been absorbed (by
internal or digestive heat). Hunger and thirst
are the functions of te body, and satisfaction
must always be afforded me by that by which
they are removed; for when hunger is no
longer sensible, pleasure and contentment of
mind are faculties of the intellect : ask their
condition of the mind then, for man is not
affected by them. For your three other
questions, Where I dwell? Whither I go? and
Whence I come? hear this reply. Man (the soul
of man) goes every where, and penetrates
every where, like the either; and is it rational
to inquire where it is? or whence or whither
you go.

नाहं गन्ता न चागन्ता नैकदेशनिकेतन:।

त्वं चान्ये च न च त्वं त्वं नान्ये नैवाहमप्यहम्।। २५॥

मृष्टं न मृष्टमप्येषा जिज्ञासा मे कृता तव।

fe वक्ष्यसीति तत्रापि श्रूयतां द्विजसत्तम।। २६॥

किमस्वाद्दवा भृष्टं भुञ्जतोऽन्नं द्विजोत्तम!

मृष्टमेव यदामृष्टं तदैवोद्देगकारकम्॥ २७॥

अमृष्टं जायते ae मृष्टादुद्विजते जन:।

आदिमध्यावसानेषु किमन्नं रुचिकारकम्।। २८॥

I neither am going nor coming, nor is my
dwelling in any one place; nor are you, thou;
nor are others, others; nor am IJ, I. If you
wonder what reply I should make to your
inquiry why I made any distinction between
