550

THE VISNU-PURANAM

the term meditation (Yoga), by understanding
which I may behold the supreme being, the
upholder of the universe.

पराशर Sara

यथा केशिध्वज: wre खाण्डिक्याय महात्मने।

जनकाय पुरा योगं तथाहं कथयामि ते।। ५॥

Paraésara said~ I will repeat to you,
Maitreya, the explanation formerly given by
Kesidhwaja to the magnanimous Khandikya,
also called Janaka.

मैत्रेय उवाच
खाण्डिक्य: कोऽभवद् ger को वा केशिध्वजोऽभवत्।
कथं तयोश्च संवादो योगसम्बन्धवानभूत्।। ६॥

Maitreya said— Tell me first, Brahman,
who Khandikya was, and who was
Kesidhwaja; and how it happened that a
conversation relating to the practice of Yoga
occurred between them.
पराशर उवाच

धर्म्मध्वजो वै जनकस्तस्य Yat मितध्वज:।
कृतध्वजश्च ATCA स सदाध्यात्मरतिर्नृष:।।७॥
कृतध्वजस्य पुत्रोऽभूत् ख्यात: केशिध्वजो द्विज:।
पुत्रो मितध्वजस्यापि खाण्डिक्यो जनकोऽभवत्॥८॥
कर्म्ममार्गेऽति खाण्डिक्य: पृथिव्यामभवत् कृती।
केशिध्वजोऽप्यतीवासीदात्मविद्याविशारद:॥ ९॥
तावुभावपि खाण्डिक्य: विजिगीषु परस्परम्।
केशिध्वजेन खाण्डिक्य: स्वराष्टादवरोपित:॥ १०॥
पुरोधसा मन्तिभिश्च समवेतोऽल्पसाधन:।
राज्यान्निराकृत: सोऽथ दुर्गारण्यचरोऽभवत् ॥११॥
इयाज सोऽपि सुबहून् यज्ञान् ज्ञानव्यपाश्रय:।
ब्रह्मविद्यामधिष्ठाय ay मृत्युमविद्यया।। १२॥

Pardsara said- There was Janaka, named
Dharmadhwaja, who had _ two _ sons,
Amitadhwaja and Krtadhwaja; and the latter
was a king ever intent upon existent supreme
spirit: his son was the celebrated Kesidhwaja.
The son of Amitadhwaja was Janaka, called
Khandikya?. Khandikya was diligent in the
way of works, and was renewed on earth for

religious rites. KeSidhwaja, on the other hand,
was endowed with spiritual knowledge. These
two were engaged in _ hostilities, and
Khandikya was driven from his principality by
Kesidhwaja. Expelled from his dominions, he
wandered with a few followers, his priest and
his counsellors, amidst woods and mountains,
where, destitute of true wisdom, he performed
many sacrifices, expecting thereby to obtain
divine truth, and to escape from death by
ignorance’,

एकदा वर्त्तमानस्य योग योगविदां वर।

धर्म्मथेनुं जघानोग्र-शार्द्दलो विजने वने॥१३॥

ततो राजा हतं ज्ञात्वा धेनुं व्याघ्रेण ऋत्विज:।

प्रायश्चितं स पप्रच्छ किंमत्रेति विधीयते।। १४॥

Once whilst the best of those who are
skilled in devotion, Kesidhwaja, was engaged
in devout exercises, a fierce tiger slew his
milch cow’ in the lonely forest. When the Raja
heard that the cow had been killed, he asked
the ministering priests what form of penance
would expiate the crime.

ते चोचुर्न वयं विद्म: कशेरु: पृच्छ्यतामिति।
कशेरुरपि तेनोक्तस्तथैव wre भार्गवम्।। १५॥

शुनकं Yes राजेन्द्र! नाहं वेद्मि स वेत्स्यति।

स गत्वा AAT सोऽप्याह Foy APTN १६॥

न कशेरुर्न चैवाहं न चान्य: साम्प्रतं भुवि।
वेत्तयेक एव त्वच्छत्रु: खाण्डिक्यो यो जितस्त्वया॥ १७॥

They replied that they did not know, and
referred him to KaSeru. KaSeru when the Raja
consulted him, told him that he knew not, but
that Sunaka would be able to tell him.
Accordingly the Raja went to Sunaka, but he
replied, “I am as unable, great king, to answer
your question as Kaseru has been; and there is
no one now upon earth who can give you the
information except your enemy Khdandikya,
whom you have conquered.”

स चाहं तं प्रयाम्येष प्रष्टुमात्मरिपुं मुने।

प्राप्त एव मया यज्ञो यदि vi स हनिष्यति।। ec
प्रायश्चित्तमशेषेण यदि पृष्टो वदिष्यति।
ततश्चाविकलो यागो मुनिश्रेष्ठ! भविष्यति॥ १९॥
