BOOK V, CHAP. 20

473

women, attired in the most splendid dresses (27),
and emulated the radiance of the cars of the gods,
In the place of assembly there were excellent seats,
couches made of gold, and hangings of various
colours, intermixed with bunches of flowers: and
there were golden vases of water, and handsome
places for refreshment, filled with fruits of various
kinds, and cooling juices, and sherbets fit for
drinking (28). And there were many other stages
and platforms, constructed of strong timber, and
hangings by hundreds and thousands were
displayed: and upon the tops of the houses, cham-
bers fitted up with delicate jalousies, through which
the women might behold the sports, appeared like
swans flying through the air,

“In front stood the pavilion of Kansa, surpassing
all the rest in splendour, looking like mount Meru
in radiance; its sides, its columns, being covered
with burnished gold : fastened with coloured cords;
and every way worthy the presence of a king.”

In justification of the rendering of the above, an
explanation of the technical terms, taken either
from dictionaries or from the commentators, may
be subjoined. (1) Kansa went to the Preksigira
(arm), literally ‘house of seeing;’ but it is evident,
from its interior being visible to spectators on the
tops of the houses, as subsequently mentioned, that
it was not a theatre, or covered edifice. If a building
at all, it was merely a sort of stockade. One
commentator calls it, 'a place made for seeing the
sacrifice;  धनुर्भहप्रेक्षणार्थं gd स्थानं। (2) Mafichindm
avalokaka (मञ्चानांमवलोकक:), The Mafichi is commonly
understood to signify a raised platform, with a floor
and a roof, ascended by a ladder: see Dictionary,
(3) Maficha-vata (Hwae:). Vata is either ‘site’ or
‘inclosure,' and is used here without much affecting
the sense of Mayicha. The compound is explained
by the commentators, ‘prepared places' (रचितभूमय: ),
or ‘the sites of the platforms’ (मञ्चभूमय:), (4) The
Srenis (श्रेणीनां), associations of artificers practising
the same art. One of the commentaries understands
the term to be here used to denote, not their station,
but their labours: 'The structure was the work of the
artificers' (श्रेणीनां waet). (5) Several words occur here
of technical import. The passage is, सोत्रमामा
रयुक्ताभिर्वलभीभिर्विभूषितं कुटीभिश्चप्रवृद्धाभिरेक स्तम्भैश्चभूषितं। Valabhi
is said by the commentator to mean a structure with
a pent roof, supported by six columns, Kuti, a
circular one, having seven roofs—something

perhaps like a Chinese pagoda—and four columns.
The Eka-stambha is a chamber, supported by one
column: कलभीभिरुभयतो नमत्पक्षद्वयाभि छदीभि: षत् स्तम्भामि:।
कुटीभिश्चप्रवृद्धाभि: wee: सप्तछदिकश्वतुस्तम्भै:॥ (6)
Saéraniryyiham (aRheg)- It is difficult to
understand the necessity of rafters in an inclosure in
which the platforms and stages seem to have been
erected independently of any floor or wall: but the
commentary explains Niryyiha, strong brackets,
projecting from a house: सारनिर्य्यहं दृढतागदन्ता:
गृहात्रिर्गतादारूणि।!। (7) Aslisnta suslista manchdérohanam.
The first epithet is explained, ‘not contracted’
(असंकुचितं); the second, ‘well constructed’ (साधुरचितं);
and for the ‘ascending’? (Arohanam) we have
सोपानपंक्तिर्यत्र ‘where was a line of steps,’ or ‘ladders’,
There is another reading to the text, however,
which may be rendered, ‘Having steps well secured
in their ascent above’ (उदक् प्रवणसुश्लिष्टं मञ्चारोहणं), (8)
‘Seats for king’ (नृपासनानि ). (9) Such is the literal
purport of Saficara-patha-sankulam (संचारपथसंकुलं ),
implying, possibly, the formation of passages by
fences on either side. (10) This is doubtful: the
phrase is (sa तद्वेदिकाभि: ) Channam-tad-vedikabhi.
Channam means, literally, ‘covered,’ and can
scarcely be used in the sense of 'overspread or filled
with.’ Vediké means an elevated floor or terrace,
with which a halt or edifice cannot well be ‘covered
;’ and therefore requires the sense here given to
Channa. The commentators are silent. (11) The
Mancavatas and Valabhis, as above : the other term
is Vithi, "a shop.’ ‘a terrace,’ 'a road.’ (12) Let them
be Vapusmanta (aq); ‘having painted or
sculptured figures' (चित्रयुरुषादि युक्ता:) The other
commentary render it merely ‘pleasant’ or
‘agreeable’ (स्पृहणीया:), (13) ‘Covered above with
cloths' (उपनीतोत्तरच्छदा:). The use of the awning or
Samiana is very common in India. (14) For the
wrestlers to rub over their bodies to absorb the
perspiration (मिल्लानां स्वेदोन्मार्जनार्थं ). (15) This is all
rather questionable: the passage is most usually,
घण्टास्तोरणशोभाश्च वलयश्चानुरूपत:। Vali or Ball in one sense
means ‘the edge of a thatch,' and may be put for
some sort of temporary structure, a kind of retiring
or refreshment room for the boxers and wrestlers.
In some copies it is read, परास्तरणशोभा: ‘beautiful with
clothes spread,’ on which the performers may sit
when disengaged ; perhaps a sort of carpet on the
ground. (16) The expression is again Vali
(चलयश्चोपकल्प्यतां ). Another sense of the word is.
