BOOK V, CHAP. 37

519

exclaiming, “` have done this deed
unwittingly, thinking I was aiming at the deer!
Have pity upon me, who am consumed by my
crime; for you are to consume me!"

षराशर उवाच
ततस्तं भगवानाह न तेऽस्ति भयमण्वपि।
गच्छ त्वं मत्प्रसादेन AT स्वर्गे सुरालयम्॥६६॥
विमानमागतं सद्यस्तद्वाक्यसमनन्तरम्।
आरुह्यं प्रययौ स्वर्गं लुब्धकस्तत्प्रसादत:।। ६७॥
गते तस्मिन् स भगवान् संयोज्यात्मानमात्मनि।

ब्रह्मभूतेऽव्ययेऽचिन्त्ये वासुदेवमयेऽमले।। ६ ८॥

अजन्मन्यजरेऽनाशिन्यप्रमेयेऽखिलात्मनि।

तत्याज मानुषं देहमतीत्य त्रिविधां af ६९॥

इति श्री विष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे सप्तत्रिंश: अध्याय:॥

Bhagavat replied, "Fear not you in the
least." Go, hunter, through my favour, to
heaven the abode of the gods. As soon as he
held thus spoken, a celestial car appeared, and
the hunter, ascending it, forthwith proceeded
to heaven. Then the illustrious Krsna having
united himself with his own pure spiritual,
inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn,
undecaying, imperishable, and universal spirit,
which is one with Vasudeva, abandoned his
mortal body and the condition of the threefold
qualities. '*

NOTES

1, A name of Arjuna, the great friend of Krsna,
to whom the latter served as charioteer in the war
between the Pandus and Kurus.

2. With Balarima, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and
the rest.

3. The legend of the destruction of the Yadava
race, and the death of Krsna, appears probably in its
Maugala Parva of the Mahabharata. It forms the
narrative portion of the eleventh book of the
Bhagavata, having been previously briefly adverted
to in the first and third books; and it is summarily
told in the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana.

4. The village of Pindaraka, still held in
veneration, is situated in Gujarat, about twenty
miles from the north-west extremity of the
Peninsula, Hamilton. II 664.

5. The term is Eraka (एरका), which is explained in
some medical lexicons, ‘a kind of grass.’ The
commentator also calls it a kind of grass : and in
the text of the Mahabharata the term subsequently
used, and as synonymous with it..is Trna (9),
‘grass.’ The Mahabharata, describing the affray
which follows, mentions that the grass or rushes. on
being plucked by Krsna and the Yadavas, turn to
clubs. The text, and that of the Bhagavata, here say,
that the powdered particle, floating on the sea,
became rushes : or the latter may imply, that they
fastened upon grass or weeds. The commentator,
however, explains that the particles of iron being
borne to land, they were so transformed. The
Mahabharata says nothing of the piece which could
not be pounded, and this seems to be an
embellishment either of our text or the Bhagavata,
The Mahabharata, however, adds another
precaution, which the two others have left
unnoticed. Ugrasena causes a proclamation to be
made, that none of the inhabitants of Dvaraka shall
thenceforth drink wine, on pain of being impaled
alive; and the people for some time observe the
prohibition.

6. Nothing of this kind occurs in the
Mahabharata our text therefore offers an
embellishment. The Bhagavata, again improves
upon the text; for, not content with a messenger, it
makes Brahma with the Prajapatis, Siva with the
Bhitas, Indra with the other divinities, all come in
person : indicating evidently a later date, as plainly
as the addition of the text shows it to be subsequent
to the date of the legend in the Mahabharata.

7. The Mahabharata, which delights in
describing portents and signs, does not fail to detail
them here. A dreadful figure, death personified,
haunts every house, coming and going no one
knows how, and being invulnerable to the weapons
by which he is assailed. Strong hurricanes blow;
large rats multiply, and infest the roads and houses,
and attack persons in their sleep; Sdrikas, or
starlings, utter inauspicious screams in their cages;
storks imitate the hooting of owls, and goats the
howling of jackals; cows bring-forth foals, and
camels mules ; food, in the moment of being eaten,
is filled with worms; fire burns with discoloured
flames: and at sunset and sunrise the air is traversed
by headless and hideous spirits. There is more to
the same effect, which neither our text nor the
