BOOK V, CHAP. 7

with both his hands, he bent it down and set
his foot upon the hitherto undended head and
danced upon it in trrumph. Wherever the snake
attempted to raise his head, it was again
trodden down and many bruises were inflicted
on the hood by the pressure of the toes of Krs
na. Trampled upon by the feet of Krsna, as
they changed position in the dance, the snake
fainted and vomited forth much blood’.
Beholding the head and neck of their lord thus
injured and the blood flowing from his mouth,
the females of the snake-king implored the
clemency of Madhusiidana.

नागपत्न्य ऊचु:

ज्ञातोऽसि देवदेवेश। सर्वेशस्त्वमनुत्तम।

परं ज्योतिपचिन्त्यं यस्तदंश: परमेश्वर:।।४८॥

न समर्था: सुरा: स्तोतुं यमनन्यभवं प्रभुम्।
स्वरूपवर्णनं तस्य कथं योषित् करिष्यति॥४९॥
ब्रह्माण्डपल्पकांशांश-स्तोष्यामस्तं कथं वयम्।।५०॥
यतन्तो न विदुर्नित्यं यत्स्वरूपं हि योगिन:।
परमार्थमणोरल्पं स्थूलात् स्थूलं नता: स्म ANG VU
न यस्य जन्मने धाता यस्य नान्ताय चान्तक:।
स्थितिक्त्ता न चान्योऽस्ति यस्य तस्मै नम: सदा।।५२॥
कोप: स्वल्पोऽपि ते नास्ति क्षितिपालनमेव ते।
कारणं कालियस्यास्य दमने श्रूयतामत:।।५३॥
स्रियोऽनुकम्प्या: साधूनां मूढा दीनाश्च जन्तव:।
यतस्ततोऽस्य GAS ATA क्षमतां वर॥ ५४॥

**You are recognised, 0 god of gods !’
they exclaimed; ‘‘you are the sovereign of all;
you are light supreme, inscrutabic; you are the
mighty lord, the portion of that supreme light.
The gods themselves are unable worthily to
praise you, the lord self-existence; how then
shall femalcs proclaim your nature ? How
shall we fully declare him of whom the egg of
Brahma, made up of earth, sky, water, fire and
air, is-but a small portion of a part? Holy sages
have in vain sought to know your eternal

essence. We bow to that form which is the
most subtle of atoms, the largest of the large;

433

to him whose birth is without a creator, whose
end knows no destroyer and who alone is the
cause of duration. There is no wrath in you;
for your is the protection of the world; and
hence this chastisement of Kaliya. Yet hear us.
Women are to be regarded with pity by the
virtuous: animals are humanely treated even
by fools. Let therefore the author of wisdom
have compassion upon this poor creature.

समस्त-जगदाधारो भवानल्पवल: फणी।

त्वया च पीडितो जह्यान्मुहूर्त्तर्धेन जीवितम्॥ ५५॥
aa पन्नगोऽल्पवीर्य्यऽयं क्व भवान् भुवनाश्रय:।
प्रीति-द्देषौ सोमत्कृष्ट-गौचरौ च यतौऽव्यय:॥५६॥
ग्राणांस्त्यजति नागोऽयं भर्त्तशिक्षा प्रदीयताम्।। ५७॥

Yourself, as an oviparous, hooded snake,
are the upholder of the world. Oppressed by
you, he will speedily perish. What is this
feeble serpent, compared to you in whom the
universc reposes ? Friendship and enmity are
felt towards equals and superiors, not for those
infinitely bencath us. Then, sovereign of the
world, have mercy upon us. This unfortunate
snake is about 10 expire : give us, as a gift of
charity, our husband.”

पराशर उवाच

इत्युक्ते ताभिराश्वस्य कून्तदेहोऽपि पन्नग:।

wale देवदेवेति we वाक्यं शनै: शनै:।। ५८॥

कालिय उवाच

तवाष्टगुणमैश्वर्य नाथ! स्वाभाविकं बलम्।

निरस्तातिशयं यस्य तस्य स्तोष्यामि किन्न्वहम्।। ५९॥

त्वं परस्त्वं परस्याद्य: परं त्वत्त: परात्मक:।

परस्मात् परमो यस्त्यं तत: स्तोष्यामि किं न्वहम्।। ६०॥

TENS ब्रह्मा च रुद्रश्व चन्देन्द्रमरुतोऽश्विनौ।

वसवश्व सहादित्यैस्तस्य स्तोष्यामि fe न्वहम्॥ ६ १॥
iat यस्यैतदखिलं जगत्।

कल्पनावयस्त्वेष तं स्तोष्यामि कथं न्वहम्।। ६२॥

सदसदूषिणो यस्य ब्रह्माद्यास्तिदशोत्तमा:।

परमार्थ न जानन्ति तस्य स्तोष्यामि किं त्वहम्।। ६ ३॥
