94

सन्ध्योषास्तिं करिष्यामि क्रियालोपोऽन्यथा भवेत्।। २५॥
तत: प्रहस्य मुदिता तं सा we महामुनिम्।

fara सर्वधर्मज्ञ परिव्रत्तमहस्तव।। २६॥

बहूनां fax वर्षाणां परिणाममहस्तव।

गतमेतन्न कुरुते विस्मयं कस्य कथ्यताम्।। २७॥

On one occasion the sage was going forth
from their cottage in a great hurry. The nymph
asked him where he was going. 'The day,' he
replied, ‘is drawing fast to a close: I must
perform the Sandhya worship, or a duty will
be neglected.’ The nymph smiled mirthfully as
she rejoined, 'Why do you talk, grave sir, of
this day drawing to a close; your day is a day
of many years, a day that must be a marvel to
all: explain what this means."

मुनिरुवाच ।
प्रातस्त्वमागता भद्रे नदीतीरमिदं शुभम्।

मया दृष्टासि तन्वङ्नि प्रविष्टा च ममाश्रयम्॥ २८॥

इयञ्च ad सन्ध्या परिणाममहर्गतम्।
उपहास: किमर्थोऽयं wala: कथ्यतां FAN २९॥

The Muni said, 'Fair damsel, you came to
the river-side at dawn; I beheld you then, and
you then entered my hermitage. It is now the
revolution of evening, and day is gone. What

is the meaning of this laughter Tell me the-
truth.'

प्रम्लोचोवाच

प्रत्यूषस्यागता ब्रह्मन् सत्यमेतन्न ते मृषा।
किन्त्वद्य तस्य कालस्य गतान्यब्दशतानि ते।। ३ ol
Pramlocé answered, You say rightly,
venerable Brahman, ‘that I came hither at
morning dawn, but several hundred years have
passed since the time of my arrival This is the
truth.'

सोम sara
तत: ससाध्वसो विप्रस्तां पप्रच्छायतेक्षणाम्।
कथ्यतां भीरु क: कालस्तया मे रमत: सह।। ३१
प्रम्लोचोवाच
सप्तोत्तराण्यतीतांनि नववर्षशंतानि ते।

THE VISNU-PURANAM

भासाश्च षट् तथैवान्यत् समतीतं दिनत्रयम्॥ ३ २॥

The Muni, on hearing this. was seized with
astonishment. and asked her how long he had
enjoyed her society; to which the nymph
replied, that they had lived together nine
hundred and seven years, six months, and
three days.

ॠषिरुवाच
सत्यं भीरु वदस्येतत् परिहासोऽथ वा शुभे।
दिनमेकमहं मन्ये त्वया सार्द्धमिहासितम्।। ३ ३॥
प्रम्लोचोवाच
वदिष्याम्यनृतं ब्रह्मन् कथमत्र तवान्तिके।
विशेषेणाद्य भवता पृष्टा मार्गानुवत्तिना॥ ३४॥

The Muni asked her if she spoke the truth,
or if she was in jest; for it appeared to him.
that they had spent but one day together: to
which Pramlocha replied, that she should not
dare at any time to tell him who lived in the
path of picty an untruth, hue particularly when
she had been enjoined by him to inform him
what had passed.

निशम्य ag वच: सत्यं स मुनिर्नृपनन्दना:।
घिङ्गां धिङ् मामतीवेत्यं निनिन्दात्मानमात्मना।। ३५॥

“When the Muni, princes, had heard these
words, and knew that it was the truth, he began
to reproach himself bitterly,

मुनिरुवाच
तपांसि मम नष्टानि हतं ब्रह्मविदां धनम्।
हतो विवेक: केनापि योषिन्मोहाय निर्मिता।। ३६॥
ऊर्मिषट्कातिगं ब्रह्म ज्ञेयमात्मजयेन मे।
मतिरेषा gat येन धिक तं काममहाग्रहम्।। ३७॥
व्रतानि वेदविद्याप्तिकारणान्यखिलानि च।
THAT सङ्गेनापहृतानि मे।। ३ ८॥
विनिन्दयेत्यं स धर्मज्ञ: स्वयमात्मानमात्मना।
तामप्सरसमासीनामिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥ ३९॥

He exclaimed saying that ‘Fie, fie upon
me; my penance has been interrupted; the
treasure of the learned and the pious has been
stolen from me; my judgment has been
