३60

THE VISNU-PURANAM

he might not occasion any disagreement
amongst the family. Satrajit, on the other hand,
fearing that Krsna would ask him for the
jewel, transferred it to his brother Prasena.
Now it was the peculiar property of this jewel,
that although it was an inexhaustible source of
good to a virtuous person, yet when worn by a
man of bad character it was the cause of his
death. Prasena having taken the gem and hung
it round his neck, mounted his horse and went
to the woods to hunt. In the chase he was
killed by lion. The lion, taking the jewel in his
mouth, was about to depart, when he was
observed and killed by Jambavant, the king of
the bears, who carrying off the gem retired
into his cave and gave it to his son Sukumara

to play with.
तस्मिन् we कृष्णो

कर्णाकर्ण्यकथयत्।। १९॥

When some time had elapsed and Prasena
did not appear, the Yadavas began to whisper
one to another and to say, "This is Krgna's
doing; desirous of the jewel and not obtaining
it, he has perpetrated the murder of Prasena in
order to get it into his possession."

विदितलोकापवादवृत्तान्तश्च war यदुस्यैन्यपरिवार:
सिंहेन अखिलजनपदमध्ये सिंहपददर्शनकृतपरिशुद्धि:
सिंहपदमनुससार।। २०॥

ऋक्षविनिहतञ्च सिंहमप्यल्पे भूमिभागे दृष्टवा ततश्च
तद्र्गौरवादृक्षस्यापि पदान्यनुययौ। गिरितटे च सकलमेव
यदुसैन्यमवस्थाप्य तत् पदानुसारी ऋक्षविलं प्रविवेश। अर्द्ध
शुश्राव।। २ vil

When these calumnious rumours came to
the knowledge of Krsna, he collected a
number of the Yadavas and accompanied by
them pursued the course of Prasena by the
impressions of his horse's hoofs. Ascertaining
by this means that he and his horse had been

killed by a lion, he was acquitted by all the
people of any share in his death. Desirous of
recovering the gem he then followed the steps
of the lion and at no great distance came to the
place where the lion had been killed by the
bear. Following the foot-marks of the latter, he
arrived at the foot of a mountain, where he
desired the Yadavas to await him, while he
continued the track. Still guided by the marks
of the feet, he discovered a cavern and had
scarcely entered it, when he heard the nurse of
Sukumara saying to him,

fag: प्रसेनमवधीत् सिंहो जाम्बवता हत:।

सुकुमारक! मा रोदीस्तव ह्येष स्यमन्तक:।। २२॥

इत्याकर्ण्य लग्धस्यमन्तकोदन्तोऽन्त:प्रविष्ट:द कुमार-
क्रीडनकीकृतञ्च धात्रीहस्ते तेजोभिज्जज्विल्यमानं स्यमन्तकं
ददर्श॥ २३॥

Te स्यमन्तकाभिलाषचक्षुषमपूर्व पुरुषमागतमवेक्ष्य धात्री

t त्राहि त्राहीति व्याजहार।। २४॥

स जाम्बवान्
a स यदुसैनिकास्तत्र सप्ताष्टदिनानि

तन्निष्कान्तिमुदीक्षमाणस्तस्थु:। अनिष्क्रममाणे च मधुरिपौ

असाववश्यमत्र विलेऽत्यन्तनाशमाप्तो भविष्यत्यन्यथा तस्य
कथमेतावन्ति दिनानि शत्रुजये व्याक्षेपो भवतीति
क्वृताध्यवसाया द्वारकामागताहत: कृष्ण इति
कथयामासु:।॥ २५॥

"The lion killed Prasena; the lion has been
killed by Jambavant : weep not, Sukumara, the
Syamantaka is your own." Thus assured of his
object, Krsna advanced into the cavern and
saw the brilliant jewel in the hands of the
nurse, who was giving it as a play thing to
Sukumara. The nurse soon descried his
approach and marking his eyes fixed upon the
gem with eager desire, called loudly for help.
Hearing her cries, Jambavant, full of anger,
came to the cave and a conflict ensued
between him and Acyuta, which lasted twenty-
one days. The Yadavas who had accompanied
the latter waited seven or eight days in
expectation of his return, but-as the foe of
