356

THE VISNU-PURANAM

स त्वेकदातिप्रभूत-गज-तुरग-सम्मर्ददेनातिदारुणे महाहवे
युध्यमान: सकलमेवारातिचक्रमजयत्। तचारिचक्रमपास्तपुत्र-
प्रविदुतम्॥ ३॥

तस्मिंश्च विद्रुतेऽतित्रासाल्लोलायतलोचनयुगलं त्राहि तात
भ्रातरित्याकुल विलापविधुरं राजकन्यारत्नमद्राक्षीत्।४॥

On one occasion the king, after a desperate
conflict with elephants and horscs, defeated a
powerful foe, who abandoning wife, children,
kin, army, treasure and dominion fled. When
the enemy was put to flight, Jyimagha beheld
a lovely princess left alone and exclaiming,
"Save me, father! Save me, brother!" as her
large eyes rolled widely with affright.

तद्दर्शनाच्च तस्यामनुरागानुगतान्तरात्म
US PATA ५॥
अथ चैनां स्यन्दनमारोप्य स्वमधिष्ठानं नयामि। ६॥

तथैव देव्याहमनुज्ञात: समुद्दक्ष्यामिति। अथैनां रथमारोप्य
स्वनगरमागच्छत्॥७॥

The king was struck by her beauty and
penetrated with affection for her and said to
himself, "This is fortunate; I have no children
and am the husband of a sterile bride; this
maiden has fallen into my hands to rear up to
me posterity : I will espouse her; but first I
will take her in my car and convey her to my
palace, where I must request the concurrence
of the queen in these nuptials." Accordingly he
took the princes into his chariot and rcturned
to his own capital.

विजयिनञ्च राजानमशेषपौरभृत्यपरिनामात्यसमवेता जैव्या
द्रष्टुमधिष्ठानद्वारमागता॥ ८॥।

सा च अवलोक्य राज्ञ: सव्यषार्श्ववर्तिनीं कन्यामीषदुद्धू
तापर्षस्फुरदधरपल्लवा राजानमवोचत्-अतिचएलचित्तात्र
स्यन्दने केयमारोपिता इति। असांवप्यनालोचितोत्तर-
वचनोऽतिभयात् तामाह,-- स्नुषा ममेयमिति॥ ९॥

When = Jydmagha's approach = was
announced, Saivya came to the palace gate,
attended by the ministers, the courtiers and the

a

citizens, to welcome the victorious monarch;
but when she beheld the maiden standing on
the left hand of the king, her lips swelled and
slightly quivered with resentment and she said
to JSyimagha, "Who is this light-hearted
damsel that is with you in the chariot?" The
king unprepared with a reply, made answer
precipitately, through fear of his queen; "This
is my daughter-in-law.”

अथैनं शैव्योवाच।

नाहं प्रसूता पुत्रेण नान्या पत्यभवत् तव।

स्नुषासम्बन्धवाच्यैषा कतमेन सुतेन A १०॥

इत्यात्मेर्याकोप-कलुषित-वचनमुषितविवेकतया
दुरुक्तपरिहारार्थमिदमवनीपतिराह-॥ ११॥

यस्ते जनिष्यत्यात्मज:), तस्येयमनागतमेव भार्य्य

निरूपिता। इत्याकण्येद्भितमृदुहासा तथेत्याह प्रविवेश च
Tat सहाधिष्ठानमिति॥ १२॥

"I have never had a son, rejoined Saivyd,
"and you have no other children. Of what son
of yours then is this girl the wife?" The king
disconcerted by the jealousy and anger which
the words of Saivya displayed, made this reply
to her in order to prevent further contention;
"She is the young bride of the future son
whom you shall bring forth." Hearing this,
Saivya smiled gently and said, "So be it;" and
the king entered into his great palace.

अनन्तरञ्चातिशुद्धलग्नहोरांशकावयवोक्त-
कृतपुत्रजन्मालापगुणाद् वयस: परिणाममुपगतापि sear
स्वल्पैरेवाहोभिर्गर्भमवाप॥ १३॥

कालेन च पुत्रमजीजनत्। wet च विजर्भ इति पिता नाम

चक्रे। स च तां स्नुषामुपयेमे।। १४॥

In consequence of this conversation
regarding the birth of a son having taken place
in an auspicious conjunction, aspect and
season, the queen, although passed the time of
women, became shortly afterwards pregnant
and bore a son. His father named him Vijarbha
and married him to the damsel, he had brought
home.

तस्याञ्चासौ क्रथ-कौशिकसंज्ञो पुत्रावजनयत्। पुनश्च तृतीयं
