BOOK IJ, CHAP. 3 153
जानीम नैतत् क्व वयं विलीने bracelet, by the ocean of salt water, of similar
स्वर्गप्रदे कर्मणि देहबन्ध्रम्। dimensions.
६३.३.३
प्राप्स्याम धन्या: खलु ते मनुष्या

ये भारते नेन्द्रियविप्रहीणा:॥ २६॥

In the Bharata-varsa it is that the
succession of four Yugas or ages, the Krta the
Treta. The Dvapara, and Kali, takes place; that
pious ascetics engage in rigorous penance; that
devout men offer sacrifices; and that gifts are
distributed; all for the sake of another world.
In Jambu-dvipa, Visnu, consisting of sacrifice,
is worshipped, as the male of sacrificial rites,
with sacrificial ceremonies: he is adored under
other forms elsewhere. Bharata is therefore the
best of the divisions of Jambu-dvipa, because
it is the land of works: the others are places of
enjoyment alone. It is only after many
thousand births, and the aggregation of much
merit, that living beings are sometimes born in
Bharata as men. The gods themselves exclaim,
“Happy are those who are born, even from the
condition of gods, as men.in Bharata-varsa, as
that is the way to the pleasures of Paradise, or
the greater blessing of final liberation. Happy
are they who, consigning all the unheeded
rewards of their acts to the supreme and
eternal Visnu, obtain existence in that land of
works, as their path to him. We know not,
when the acts that have obtained us heaven
shall have been fully recompensed,’ where we
shall renew corporeal confinement; but we
know that those men are fortunate who are
born with perfect faculties in Bharata-varsa.

नववर्षं तु मैत्रेय! जम्बूद्बीपमिदं मया।
लक्षयोजनविस्तारं संक्षेपात् कथितं Tan २७॥
जम्बूद्वीपं ager लक्षयोजनविस्तर:।

मैत्रेय! वलयाकार: स्थितं क्षारोदधिर्बहि:।। २८॥
fe श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयेऽंशे तृतीयोऽध्याय:।

I have thus briefly described to you,
Maitreya, the nine divisions of Jambu-dvipa,
which is a hundred thousand Yojanas in
extent, and which is encircled, as if by a

NOTES

1 As Bharata-varsa means India, a nearer
approach to the truth, with. regard to its extent,
might have been expected: and the Vayu has
another measurement, which is not much above
twice the actual extent, or 1000 Yojanas from
Kumari (Comorin) to the source of the Ganga.

2. These are called the Kulaparvatas, family
mountains, or mountain ranges or systems. They
are similarly enumerated in all the authorities, and
their situation may be determined with some
confidence by the rivers which flow from them.
Mahendra is the chain of hills that extends from
Orissa and the northern Circars to Gondwana part
of which, near Ganjam, is still called Mahindra
Malei. or hills of Mahindra ; Malaya is the southern
portion of the western Ghats: Suktimat is doubtful,
for none of its streams can be identified with any
certainty: Sahya is the northern portion of the
western Ghats, the mountains of the Konkan: Rksa
is the mountains of Gondwana: Vindhya is the
general name of the chain that stretches across
central India, but it is here restricted to the eastern
division; according to the Vayu it is the part south
of the Narmada, or the Sathpura range: Paripatra, as
frequently written Pariyatra, is the northern and
western portion of the Vindhya: the name. indeed,
is still given to a range of mountains in Guzerat
(see Tod's Map of Rajasthan), but the Chambal and
other rivers of Malwa, which are said to flow from
the P&riyatra mountains,, do not rise in that
province. All these mountains therefore belong to
one system, and are connected together. The
classification seems to have been known to
Ptolemy, as he specifies seven ranges of mountains,
although his names do not correspond, with the
exception of the Vindus mons: of the others, the
Adisathrus and Uxentus agree nearly is position
with the P4riydtra and Rksa: the Apocopi.
Sardonix, Bettigo, and Orudi must be left for
consideration. The Bhagavata, Vayu. Padma, and
Markandeya add a list of inferior mountains to
these seven.

3. This last is similarly left without a name in all
the works: it is the most southerly, that on the
