BOOK I, CHAP. 22

139

traditional scriptures, and religious manuals;'°
poems, and all that is said or sung; are the
body of the mighty Visnu, assuming the form
of sound. All kinds of substances, with or
without shape, here or elsewhere, are the body
of Visnu.

नान्यत् तत: कारणकार्यजातम्।

Soya यस्य न तस्य भूयो
भवोद्भवा द्वन्द्वगदा भवन्ति।। ८ ६॥

[ am Hari. All that I behold is Janarddana;
cause and effect are from none other than him.
The man who knows these truths shall never
again experience the afflictions of worldly
existence.

इत्येष AST: प्रथम: पुराणस्यास्य वै द्विज!
यथावत् कथितो यस्मिन् श्रुते पापै: प्रमुच्यते।। ८७॥
कार्तिक्यां पुष्करस्नाने द्वादशाब्देन यत् फलम्।
तदस्य श्रवणात् सर्वं मैत्रेयाप्नोति मानव:॥ ८८॥

देविपितृगन्धर्वयक्षादीनाञ्च सम्भवम्।
wate शृण्वत: Yar दॆवाद्या वरदा FAI ८९॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे द्वाविंशोऽध्याय:।

Thus, Brahman, has the first portion of this
Purana been duly revealed to you: listening to
which, expiates all oflences. The man who
hears this Purana obtains the fruit of bathing in
the Puskara lake'' for twelve years, in the
month of Kartik. The gods bestow upon him
who hears this work the dignity of a divine
sage, of a patriarch, or of a spirit of heaven.

जत्जत्जुत्ज
NOTES

1. These are similarly enumerated in the Vayu,
Brahma, Padma. Bhagavata, etc. with some

additions; as, Agni, king of the Pitrs, Vayu. of the
Gandharvas; Silapani (Siva), of the Bhitas ;
Kubera, of riches, and of the Yaksas; Vasuki of the
Nagas; Taksaka, of serpents; Chitraratha, of the
Gandharvas; Kadmadeva, of the Apsaraas;
Vipracitta, of the Déanavas;
Parjanya, of clouds; Samvatsara, of times and

Raéhu, of meteors;.

seasons Samudra, of rivers; Himavat, of
mountains, etc.

2. We have already had occasion to notice the
descent of those Lokap4las, as specified in the
Vayu Purana; and it is evident, although the Visnu
does not supply a connected series of generations,
yet that both accounts are derived from a common
source.

3. Vibhiti, superhuman or divine power or
dignity.

4. The question, according to the commentator,
implies a doubt how the supreme being, who is
without qualities, can be subject to specific variety,
or to existence in divided and different conditions.

5. Of Brahmabhita (ब्रह्मभूतस्य); of him who or that
which becomes identified with the supreme spirit,
which is the same respectively with absolute
wisdom. Jiiana (a4 ), and discriminative wisdom.
Vijiiana (faa); leading to felicity, or the condition
of Brahma, expressed by the words. Satcitanandam
(सच्चिदानन्दं ), ‘entire tranquillity of mind, ‘or internal
enjoyment :’ the same also with the combination of
wisdom and tranquillity, which the devotee
believes to exist in Adwaita ‘non-duality.” or unity
of god and himself: and finally the same with the
aggregate of these three processes or the conviction
that spirit is one, universal, and the same.

6. The epithets of Jnana, ‘wisdom,’ here
employed, are taken isa) the Yoga philosophy.
"Requires no exercise,’ Nirvyapara (Feater), is
explained, ‘without the practice of abstract
contemplation,’ etc. (ध्यानादिशून्यॆ). ‘Not to be taught’
Anakhyeyam (अनाख्येयॆ), ‘not capable of being
enjoined’ (निर्देशानर्ह) = "Internally _— diffused."
Vyaptimatram (emer), means ‘menial
identification of individual with universal spirit’
(मनसा ब्रह्माकारतामाक्षरूपं ), The phrase आत्मसम्बोधविषयं।
translated 'the object of which is self-illumination.’
is explained tava. ‘Simply existent’ (सत्तामात्रं ) is
said to mean. 'being unmodified by the accidents of
happiness etc. (आनन्दादिविशेषशून्यं), consequently it is
not to be defined (अलक्षणं ). So the Yoga Pradipa
explains Samadhi, or contemplation, to be the
entire occupation of the thoughts by the idea of
Brahma, without any effort of the mind. It is the
entire abandonment of the faculties to one all-
engrossing notion (मनोवृत्तिशून्यस्य ब्रह्माकारतया स्थिति: या
संप्रज्ञातनामासौ समाधिरभिधीयते),. "Tranquil, Prasantam
(प्रशान्तं), is being void of passion.’ etc. (रागादिशून्यं ).
