BOOK I, CHAP. 13

85

told him, that in the interval in which the earth
was without a king all vegerable products had
been withheld, and that consequently the
people had perished.

अराजके नृपश्रेष्ठ धरित्र्या सकलौषधी:।
ग्रस्तास्तत: क्षयं यान्ति WaT: सर्वा: प्रजेश्चर:।। ६६॥
त्वं नो वृत्तिप्रदो धात्रा प्रजापालो निरूपित:।
देहि न: क्षुत्परीतानां प्रजानां जीवनौषधी:।। ६७॥
They said— “O king, you are the bestower
of subsistence to us; you are appointed, by the
creator, the protector of the people: grant us

vegetables, the support of the lives of your
subjects, who are perishing with hunger.”

पराशर उवाच
ततोऽथ नृपतिर्दिव्यमादायाजगवं धनु:।

शरांश्च दिव्यान् कुपित: सोऽन्वधावदू वसुन्धराम्। ६८॥

ततो ननाश त्वरिता गौर्भूत्वा तु वसुन्धरा।

सा लोकान् ब्रह्मलोकादीन् तत्वासादगमन्मही।॥ ६ ९॥

यत्र यत्र ययौ देवी सा तदा भूतधारिणी।

तत्र तत्र तु सा वैण्यं ददर्शाभ्युद्यतायुधम्॥७०॥।

ततस्तं WE वसुधा पृथुं पृथुपराक्रमम्।

प्रवेषमाणा तद्बाणपरित्राणपरायणा। ७ १॥।

On hearing this, Prthu took up his divine
bow Ajagava, and his celestial arrows, and in
great wrath marched forth to assail the Earth.
Earth, assuming the figure of a cow, fled
hastily from him, and traversed, through fear
of the king, the regions of Brahma and the
heavenly spheres; but wherever went the
supporter of living things, there she beheld
Vainya with uplifted weapons: at last,
trembling with terror, and anxious to escape

his arrows, the Earth addressed Prthu, the hero
of resistless prowess.

पृथिव्युवाच
स्त्रीवधे त्वं महापापं किं नरेन्द्र न पश्यसि।
येन मां हन्तुमत्यर्थं प्रकरोषि नृपोद्यमम्॥७२॥

The Earth said— “Know you not, king of
men,” the sin of killing a female, that you thus
perseveringly seek to slay me."

पृथुरुवाच
एकस्मिन् यत्र निधनं प्रापिते दुष्टकारिणि।

बहूनां भवति क्षेमं तस्य पुण्यप्रदौ वध:।॥ ७३॥

Prthu replied: "When the happiness of
many is secured by the destruction of one
malignant being, the death of that being is an
act of virtue."

प्रजानामुपकाराय ae at त्वं हनिष्यसि।
आधार: क: प्रजानां त्ते wets भविष्यति।। oxi
The Earth said “But, if in order to promote
the welfare of your subjects, you put an end to
me, whence, best of monarchs, will your
people derive their support"

पृथुरुवाच
त्वं हत्वा वसुधे वाणैर्मच्छासनपराङ्मुखीम्।
आत्मयोगबलेनेमा धारयिष्याम्यहं प्रजा:॥७५॥
“Disobedient to my rule,” rejoined Prthu,

“it I destroy you, I will support my people by
the efficacy of my own devotions.”

पराशर उवाच
तत: प्रणम्य वसुधा तं भूय: we पार्थिवम्।
प्रवेपिताङ्गी परमं साध्वसं समुपागता॥७६॥
पृथिव्युवाच
उपायत: WATE, सर्वे सिद्ध्यन्त्युपक्रमा:।
तस्माद् वदाम्युपायं ते तत् Heer यदिच्छसि।। ov
समस्तास्ता मया जीर्णा नरनाथ महौषधी:।
यदीच्छसि प्रदास्यामि at: क्षीरपरिणामिनी:।। ७ ८॥
तस्मात् प्रजाहितार्थाय मम धर्मभ्रृततां वर।
तं तु aed प्रयच्छ त्वं क्षरेयं येन वत्सला।।७९॥
समाञ्च HE सर्वत्र येन क्षीरं समन्तत:।
वरौषधी बीजभूतं वीर सर्वत्र भावये।। ८०॥

Then the Earth overcome with
apprehension, and trembling in every limb,
