BOOK I, CHAP. 21

131

शक्रं Yat निहन्ता ते यदि गर्भं शरच्छतम्।। ३ २॥
समाहिताति प्रयता शुचिनी धारयिष्यसि। .
इत्येवमुक्त्वा at edi usa: कश्यपो gf ३ ३॥
दधारं सा च तं गर्भं सम्यक् शौचसमन्विता।
गर्भमात्मवधार्थाय ज्ञात्वातं मघवानपि॥ ३४॥

` शुश्रूषुस्तामथागच्छद् विनयादमराधिप:।
सस्याश्चैवान्तरं प्रेप्सुरतिष्ठत् पाकशासन:॥३५॥

Diti, having lost her children, propitiated
Kasyapa; and the best of ascetics, being
pleased with her, promised her a boon; on
which she prayed for a son of irresistible
prowess and valour, who should destroy Indra.
The excellent Muni granted his wife the great
gift she had solicited, but with one condition :
"You shall bear a son, he said, "who shall slay
Indra, if with thoughts wholly pious, and
person entirely pure, you carefully carry the
babe in your womb for a hundred years. '
Having thus said, KaSyapa departed; and the
dame conceived. and during gestation
assiduously observed the rules of mental and
personal purity. When the king of the
immortals learnt that Diti bore a son destined
for his destruction, he came to her, and atten-
ded upon her with the utmost humility.
watching for an opportunity to disappoint her
intention.

ऊने वर्षशते चास्या ददर्शान्तरमात्मना।

अकृत्वा पादयो: शैचं दिति: शयनमाविशत्॥ ३ ६॥

निद्राञ्चाहारयामांस wen: afer wave a: !

वञ्रपाणिर्म्महागर्भं चिच्छेदाथ स सप्तधा॥३७॥

स पीड्यमानो वज्रेण प्ररुरोदातिदारुणम्।

मा रोदीरिति तं शक्र: YA: पुनरभाषत।। ३८॥

सोऽभवत् सप्तधा गर्भस्तमिन्द्र: कुपित: पुन:।

एकैकं सप्तधा चक्रे वज्रेणारिविदारिणा।। ३९॥

यदुक्तं वै मघवता तेनैव मरुतोऽभवन्॥४०॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमेऽंशे एकविंशोऽध्याय:।

At last, in the last year of the century, the

opportunity occurred. Diti retired one night to

rest without performing the prescribed
ablution of her feet, and fell asleep; on which
the thunderer divided with his thunderbolt the
embryo in her womb into seven portions, The
child, thus mutilated, cried bitterly; and Indra
repeatedly attempted to console and silence it.
but in vain: on which the god, being incensed,
again divided each of the seven portions into
seven, and thus formed the swift-moving
deities called Marutas (winds). They derived
this appellation from the words with which
Indra bad addressed them (Ma rodih, 'Weep
not’); and they became forty-nine subordinate
diviniities, the associates of the wielder of the
thunderbolt.”

NOTES

1. The Padma Purana makes these the sons of
Prahlada. The Bhagavata says there were five sons,
but does not give the names. It also insects the sons
of Hlida, making them the celebrated demons
Itwala and Vatapi. The Vayu refers to Hlada, other
Daityas, famous in Pauranic legend. making his
son, Nisunda; and his sons. Sunda and Upasunda :
the former the father of Maricha and Taraka; the
latter, of Mika.

2. The Padma Purdna and Vayu name several of
these, but they are not of any note : the latter gives
the names of two daughters, who are more
celebrated, Piitana and Sakuni.

3. The descendents of Hiranynksa are said. in the
Padma Purana. to have extended to seventy-seven
crores. or seven hundred and seventy millions.
Some copies, for Taraka, read Kalanabha.

4, The Padma and Vayu Purana furnish a much
longer list of names. but those of most note are the
same as of the text. with which also the Bhagavata
for the most part agrees.

5. The Bhagavata makes Prabha the wife of
Namuci : according to the Vayu, she is the mother
of Nahusa.

6. Married to Yayati. as will be related.

7. The text might be understood to imply that the
latter two were the daughters of Vaiswanara; and
the Bhagavata has, "The four lovely daughters of
Vaiswanara were Upadanavi, Hayasiras, Puloma,
and Kélaka." The Padma substitutes Vajra and
Sundari for the two formet names. The Vayu
