416

THE VISNU-PURANAM

योगनिद्रा महामाया वैष्णवी मोहितं यया।

अविद्यया जगत् aad ANTES भगवान् हरि:॥७०॥

The Muni Narada informed Karhsa that the
supporter of the earth. Visnu, would be the
eighth child of Devaki; and his wrath being
excited by this report, he placed both
Vasudeva and Deval in confinement.
Agreeably to his promise. the former delivered
to Karhsa each infant as soon as it was born. It
is said that these, to the numbcr of six, were
the children of the demon Hiranyakasipu, who
were introduced into the womb of Devaki, at
the command of Visnu, during the hours of
Devaki’s repose, by the goddess Yoganidra,”
the great illusory energy of Visnu, by whom,
as utter ignorance, the whole world is
beguiled. .

FAR! गच्छ ममादेशात् पातालतल-संश्रयान्।
एकैकत्वेन षड्गर्भान् देवकीजठरं नय॥७१।।

हतेषु ay कंसेन शेषाख्योऽशस्ततो मम।
अंशाशेनोदरे We: सप्तम: सम्भविष्यति।॥७२॥
ततस्या: स सम्भूतिसमं thar! नेयस्त्वयोदरम्।। ७३॥
सप्तमो भोजराजस्य भयाद् रोधोपरोधत:।

देवक्या: पत्तितो गर्भ eft लोको वदिष्यति। ७४॥
गर्भसङ्कर्षणात् सोऽथ लोके सङ्कर्षणेति वै।
संज्ञामवाप्स्य वीर: श्वेताद्रिशिखरोपम:। ७५॥
ततोऽहं सम्भजिष्यामि देवकीजठरे शुभे।

गर्भे त्वया यसोदाया गन्तव्यमविलम्बितम्।।७६॥

To her Visnu said, ‘“‘Go, औताब्व), to the
nether regions and by my command conduct
successively six of their princes to be
conceived of Devaki. When these shall have
been put to death by Kamsa, the seventh
conception shali be formed of a portion of Ses
a, who is a part of me; and this you shail
transfer, before the time of birth, to Rohini,
another wife of Vasudeva, who resides at
Gokula. The report shall run, that Devaki
miscarries, through the anxiety of

imprisonment and dread the Raja of the
Bhojas. From being extracted from his
mother’s womb, the child shall be known by
the name of Sarhkarsana and he shall be
valiant and strong and like the peak of the
white mountain in bulk and complexion. J will
myself become incarnate in the eighth
conception of Devaki; and you shall
immediately take a similar character as the
embryo offspring of Yasoda.

प्रावृट्काले च नभसि कृष्णाष्टम्यामहं निशि।
उत्पत्स्यामि नवम्याञ्च प्रसूति त्वमवाप्स्यसि।।७७॥
यशोदाशयने मान्तु देवक्यास्त्वामनिन्दिते।
मच्छक्तिप्रेरितमतिर्वसुदेवो नयिष्यति।। ७८॥

In the night of the eighth lunation of the
dark half of the month Nabhas, in the season
of the rains, I shall be born. You shall receive
birth on the ninth. Impelled and aided by my
power, Vasudeva shall bear me to the bed of
Yasoda and you to that of Devaki.

Haya त्वामुपादाय far! शैलशिलातले।
प्र्षेप्स्यत्यन्तरीक्षे च त्वं स्थानं समवाप्स्यसि।।७९॥
ततस्त्वां ASH शक्र: प्रणम्य मम गौरवात्।
प्रणिपातानतशिरा भगिनीत्वे ग्रहीष्यति।। ८ ०॥

तत: शुम्भनिशुम्भादीन्हत्वा दैत्यान् सहस्रश:।
स्थानैरनेकै: पृथिवीमशेषां मण्डयिष्यसि।। ८ en

Karhsa shall take you and hold you up to
dash you against a stone; but you shall escape
from his grasp into the sky, where the
hundred-eyed Indra shall meet and do homage
to you, through reverence for me and shall
bow before you and acknowledge you as his
sister. Having slain Sumbha, Nisumbha and
numerous other demons,” you shall sanctify
the earth in many places.”°

लज्जा: पुष्टि षा या च काचिदन्या त्वमेव सा।। ८ २॥
a त्वामार्येति दुर्गेति वेगगर्भेऽम्बिकेति a

भद्रेति भद्रकालीति aren क्षेमङ्करीति च॥ ८३॥
प्रातश्चैवापराह्ने च स्तोष्यन्त्यानम्रमूर्त्तय:।

तेषां fe प्राथितं ad मत्प्रसादाद्भविष्यति।। ८४॥
