३66

Agreeably to the advice of Andhaka ‘he
elder, the Yadavas sent a mission, headed by
KeSava, Ugrasena and Balabhadra, to assure
Akrira that no notice would be taken of any
irregularity committed by him; and having
satisfied him that he was in no danger, they
brought him back to Dvaraka. Immediately on
his arrival, in consequence of the properties of
the jewel, the plague, dearth, famine and every
other calamity and portent, ceased. Krsna,
observing this, reflected’® that the descent of
Akrira from Gandini and Svaphalka was a
cause wholly disproportionate to such an
effect and that some powerful influence must
be exerted to arrest pestilence and famine. "Of
a surety," said he to himself, "the great
Syamantaka jewel is in his keeping, for such I
have heard are amongst its properties. This
Akrira too has been lately celebrating
sacrifice after sacrifice; his own means are
insufficient for such expenses; it is beyond a
doubt that he has the jewel.” Having come to
this conclusion, he called a meeting of all the
Yadavas at his house, under the pretext of
some festive celebration. When they were all
seated and the purpose of their assembling had
been explained and the business accomplished,
Krsna entered into conversation with Akrira
and after laughing and joking, said to him, "
Kinsman, you are a very prince in your
liberality; but we know very well that the
precious jewel which was stolen by
Sudhanvan was delivered by him to you and is
now in your possession, to the great benefit of
this kingdom. So let it remain; we all derive
advantage from its virtues. But Balabhadra
suspects that I have it and therefore, out of
kindness to me, show it to the assembly."
When Akrtira, who had the jewel with him,
was thus taxed, he hesitated what he should
do. "If I deny that I have the jewel," thought
he, "they will search my person and find the
gem hidden amongst my clothes. I cannot
submit to a search." So reflecting, Akrtira said
to Narayana, the cause of the whole world, "It
is true that the Syamantaka jewel was

THE VISNU-PURANAM

entrusted to me by Satadhanvan, when he went
from hence. I expected every day that you
would ask me for it and with much
inconvenience therefore I have kept it until
now. The charge of it has subjected me to so
much anxiety, that I have been incapable of
enjoying any pleasure and have never known a
moment's ease. Afraid that you would think
me unfit to retain possession of a jewel so
essential to the welfare of the kingdom, I
forbore to mention to you its being in my
hands; but now take it yourself and give the
care of it to whom you please." Having thus
spoken, Akriira drew forth from his garments a
small gold box and took from it the jewel. On
displaying it to the assembly of the Yadavas,
the whole chamber where they sat was
illuminated by its radiance.

अथाहाक्रूर:,-एष मणिर्य: शतधन्वनास्माकं समर्पित्त:
Tad, स wt गृहणात्विति। तन्मणिरतनमालोक्य
`सर्वयादवानां साधु साध्विति विस्मितमनसां वाचाऽश्र्यन्त।
तमालोक्य ममायमुच्युतेनैव सामान्य: समन्विच्छित इति
AAR: सस्पृहोऽभवत्॥६५॥

ममैवेदं पितृधनमित्यतीव च सत्यभामापि स्पृहयाञ्चकार।

मिव मेने॥६६॥
सकलयादवसमक्षञ्चाक्रूरमाह, -एतद्धि मणिरत्नमात्म-

शोधनायैषां ag दर्शितम्। UE मम बलभद्रस्य तच
ward, पितृधनञ्चैतत् सत्यभामाया नान्यस्य।। ६७॥
Wa wart शुचिना ब्रह्मचर्यगुणवता

ध्रियमाणमशेषराष्ट्रस्योपकारकम्, अशुचिना ध्रियमाण-
माधारमेव BRT ६ ८॥

"This", said Akrira, "is the Syamantaka
gem, which was consigned to me by
Satadhanvan : let him to whom it belongs now
take it." When the Yaddavas beheld the jewel,
they were filled with astonishment and loudly
expressed their delight. Balabhadra
immediately claimed the jewel as his property
jointly with Acyuta, as formerly agreed upon;
while Satyabhima demanded it as her right, as
it had originally belonged to her father.
