BOOK IV, 1

305

the Ksatriya caste of his posterity; and the
commentator on our text observes that the son of
Nabhaga was born before his father's degradation
and consequently the race continued Ksatriya; an
assertion unsupported by any authority and it must
therefore appear that a race of Vaisya princes was
recognised by early traditions.

11. Bhanandana ; Bhagavata.

12. Vatsapriti Bhagavata, Vatsasri
Markandeya. The latter has a story of the
destruction of the Daitya Kujambha by Vidiratha,
the father of Sunandra, the wife of Vatsasti. The
Vayu has Sahasrari.

13. Pramati : Bhagavata.

14. According to the Markandeya, the priests of
the royal family conspired against this prince and
werc put to death by his ministers.

15. Caksusa ; Bhagavata.

16. Vira : Markandeya.

17. Rambha precedes Vivirhsati : Bhagavata.

18. Balagva or Balakaésva or Subalasva,
according to the Markandeya, which explains his
name Karandhama to denote his creation of an
army, when besieged by his revolted tributaries, by
breathing on his hands (करं + थम:).

19. Both forms occur, as the commentator
observes; अविक्षेरेव क्वचिदविक्षिदित्यपि। The Markandeya
has a long story of this prince's carrying off the
daughter of Visala, king of Vaidiga. Being attacked
and captured by his confederated rivals, he was
rescued by his father, but was so much mortified by
his disgrace, that he vowed never to marry nor
reign. The princess, also becoming an ascetic, met
with him in the woods and they were finally
espoused; but Aviksit kept his other vow and
relinquished his succession in favour of his son,
who succeeded to the kingdoms of both
Karandhama and Visala.

20. Most of our authorities quote the same
words, with or without addition. The Vayu adds,
that the sacrifice was conducted by Sarhvartta,
whom the Bhagavata terms a Yogi, the son of
Angiras; and that Brhaspati was so jealous of the
splendour of the rite, that a great quarrel (महान्
बिवाद:) ensued between him and Sarhvartta. How it
involved the king is not told, but apparently in
conscquence, Marutta, with his kindred and friends,
was taken by Sarhvartta to heaven : war fed नीत:
ससुहृत् सहबरान्धवै:। According to the Markandeya,

Marutta was so named from the paternal
benediction, ‘May the winds be yours,’ or ‘be
propitious to you' (मरुत् a4). He reigned, agreeably
to that record, 85000 years.

21. Omitted in the Bhagavata.

22. A rather chivalric and curious story is told of
Dama in the Markandeya. His bride Sumana,
daughter of the king Dasarha, was rescued by him

: from his rivals. One of them, Bapusmat, afterwards

killed Marutta, who had retired into the woods,
after relinquishing his crown to his son. Dama in
retaliation killed Bapusmat and made the Pinda or
obsequial offering to his father, of his flesh; with
the remainder he fed the Brahmanas of Raksasas
origin : such were the kings of the solar race.
बपुष्मतश्च मांसेन पिण्डदानं wer ह। ब्राह्मणान् भोजयामास
रक्ष-कुलसमुद्भवान्।। एवं विधा हि राजानो Yq: सूर्य्यवंशजा:।।

23. The Bhagavata has Bandhavat, Oghavat and
Bandha.

24. The Vayu and Bhagavata both add that she
was the wife of Visravas and mother of Kubera. In
the Linga Purana, she is said to have been the wife
of Pulastya and mother of Visravas. The weight of
authority is in favour of the former statement. See
Bk. I. Ch. X.n. 5.

25. The Bhagavata names three sons, Visala,
Sanyabandhu and Dhimaketu. Vaisali is a city of
considerable renown in Indian tradition, but its site
is a subject of some uncertainty. Part of the
difficulty arises from confounding it with Visala,
another name of Ujjain; उज्जयिनी स्याद्बविशाला।
Hemacandra. Also in the Meghadita, प्राप्यावन्तीं
qeaerrarqeqd श्रीविशाली। ‘Having arrived at Avanti,
proceed to the illustrious city before indicated,
Visala! विशालाभिधानमुज्जयिनीं पुरीं। To the city Ujjayini
named Visala. Comment. Vaisili however appears
to be very differently situated. According to the
Buddhists, amongst whom it is celebrated as a chief
seat of the labours of Sakhya and his first disciples,
it is the same as Prayaga or Allahabad; but the
Ramayana (1. 45) places it much lower down, on
the north bank of the Ganges, nearly opposite to the
mouth of the Sone; and it was therefore in the
modern district of Saran as Hamilton (Genealogies
of the Hindus) conjectured. In the fourth century it
was known to the Chinese traveller Fa-hian as Phi-
she-li, on the right bank of the Gandaka not far
from its confluence with the Ganges. Account of
the Foekue-ki : Trans, R. As. Soc. no. IX, p. 128.
