BOOK IIL, CHAP. 18

पत्नयुवाच
अपि स्मरसि राजेन्द्र! श्वयोनिस्थस्य यन्मया।
प्रोक्तं ते पूर्वचरितं पाषण्डालापसंश्रयम्। ७४॥
पुनस्तयोक्तस्तज्ञात्वा सत्यं सत्यवतां वर:।
कालेन स निराहारस्तत्याज स्वं कलेवरम्॥७५॥

Spouse ऽक्षंत-- “Do you not remember, oh
king, the circumstance of conversing with a
heretic, which I called to your recollection
when you was a dog?" The Raja, thus
addressed, knew that what the princess had
spoken was true and thereupon desisted from
food and died.

भूयस्ततो Fe जातं गत्वा तं निर्जने वने।
स्मारयामास Hat पूर्वव्रत्तमनिन्दिता।।७६॥

न त्वं वृको महाभाग! राजा शतधनुर्भवान्।

श्चा भूत्वा त्वं श्गालोऽभूर्व्वकत्वं साम्प्रतं गत:।। ७७॥

He then became a wolf; but his blameless
wife knew it and came to him in the lonely
forest and awakened his remembrance of his
original state. "No wolf are you," she said,
"but the illustrious sovereign Satadhanu. You
was then a dog, then a jackal and are now a
wolf."

पराशर उवाच
स्मारितेन यदा त्यक्तस्तेनात्मा गृध्रतां गत:।
अवाप सा पुनश्चैनं बोधयामास भाविनी॥ ७ ८॥
नरेन्द्र! स्मर्यतामात्मा wet ते गृध्रचेष्टया।
पाषण्डालापजातोऽयं दोषो यद्गृध्रतां गत:।॥७९॥
तत: काकत्वमापन्नं समनन्तरजन्मनि।
उवाच तन्वी भर्त्तरमुपलभ्यात्मयोगत:।। ८ ०॥
अशेषा भूभृत: पूर्वं वश्या यस्मै afer ददु:।
स त्वं काकत्वमापन्नो जातोऽद्य बलिभुक् प्रभो।। ८ १॥

Upon this, recollecting himself, the prince
abandoned his life and became a vulture; in
which form his lovely queen still found him
and aroused him to a knowledge of the past.
"Prince," she exclaimed, "recollect yourself;
away with this uncouth form, to which the sin
of conversing with a heretic has condemned
you!" The Raja was next born as a crow; when

295

the princess, who through her mystical powers
was aware of it, said to him, "You are now
yourself the eater of tributary grain, to whom,
in a prior existence, all the kings of the earth
paid tribute.””

पराशर उवाच
एवमेव च काकत्वे स्मारित: स पुरातनम्।
TAT भूपति: प्राणान् मयूरत्वमवाप च।।॥ ८ २॥
भयूरत्वं ad: सा वै चकारानुगतिं शुभा।
ad: प्रतिक्षणं हृद्यैस्तृप्तं तज्जातिभोजनै:॥ ८ ३॥
ततस्तु जनको राजा वाजिमेधं महाक्रतुम्!
War Ways स्नापयामास तं तदा।। ८४॥
wet स्वयं च तन्वङ्गी स्मारयामास चापि तम्।
यथासौ SPATE योनीर्जग्राह पाथिव:॥ ८५॥

ParaSara ऽक्षत-- Having abandoned his body,
in consequence of the recollections excited by
these words, the king next became a peacock,
which the princess took to herself and petted
and fed constantly with such food as is
agreeable to birds of its class. The king of Kasi
instituted at that time the solemn sacrifice of a
horse. In the ablutions with which it
terminated the princess caused her peacock to
be bathed, bathing also herself; and she then
reminded Satadhanu how he had _ been
successively born as various animals.

स्मृतजन्मक्रम: सोऽथ तत्याज स्वं कलेवरम्।

जज्ञे स जनकस्यैव पुत्रोऽसौ सुमहात्मन:॥ ८६॥

तत: सा पितरं तन्वी विवाहार्थमचोदयत्।

स चापि कारयामास TET राजा AAT ८७॥

स्वयंवरे कृते सा तं सम्प्राप्तं पतिमात्मन:।

वरयामास भूयोऽपि भर्तृभावेन भामिनी।। ८ cu

On recollecting this, he resigned his life.
He was then born as the son of a person of
distinction and the princess now assenting to
the wishes of her father to see her wedded, the
king of Kasi caused it to be made known that
she would elect a bridegroom from those who
should present themselves as suitors for her

hand. When the election took place, the
princess made choice of her former lord, who
