198

THE VISNU-PURANAM

without a cloud in the sky, is the water of the
heavenly Garigd, shed by the solar rays. [f,
however, rain falls from a bright and cloudless
sky whilst the sun is in the mansion of Krttika
and the other asterisms counted by odd
numbers, as the third, fifth etc., the water,
although that of the Ganga of the sky, is
scattered by the elephants of the quarters, not
by the rays of the sun: it is only when such
rain falls, and the sun is in the even asterisms,
that it is distributed by his beams.

युष्णात्योषधय: wal जीवनायामृतं हि तत्।। १९॥
तेन ofa wi नीत: सलिलेनौषधीगण:।
साधक: फलपाकान्त: प्रजानां द्विज! जायते।॥ २०॥
तेन यज्ञान् यथाप्रोक्तान् मानवा: शास्त्रचक्षुष:।
कुर्वन्त्यहरहस्तैश्च देवानाप्याययन्ति ते।। २ १॥
एवं यज्ञाश्च वेदाश्च वर्णांश्च द्विजपूर्वका:।
सर्वे देवनिकायाश्च षशुभूतगणाश्च Bn २२॥
gem धृतमिदं सर्वमन्नं निष्पाद्यते यथा।
सापि निष्पाद्यते वृष्टि: सवित्रा मुनिसत्तम॥ २३॥
आधारभूत: सवितुर्धुवो मुनिवरोत्तम।
gaa शिशुमारोऽसौ सोऽपि नारायणाश्रय:।। २४॥
हृदि नारायणस्तस्य शिशुपारस्य संस्थित:।
fasrat सर्वभूतानामादिभूत: सनात्तन:।॥। २५॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे नवमोऽध्याय:।॥

The water which the clouds shed upon
earth is in truth the ambrosia of living beings,
for it gives fertility to the plants which are the
support of their existence. By this all
vegetables grow and are matured, and become
the means of maintaining life. With them,
again, those men who take the law for their
light perform daily sacrifices, and through
them give nourishment to the gods. And thus
sacrifices, the Vedas, the four castes, with the
Brahmanas at their head, all the residences of
the gods, all the tribes of animals, the whole
world, all are supported by the rains by which

food is produced. But the rain is evolved by
the sun; the sun is sustained by Dhruva; and

Dhruva is supported by the celestial porpoise-
shaped sphere, which is one with Narayana.
Narayana, the primeval existent, and eternally
enduring, seated in the heart of stellar sphere,
is the supporter of beings.

NOTES

1. A more particular description of this porpoise
occurs farther on.

2. Consequently, the Linga P. observes, there is
no waste of water in the universe, as it is in
constant circulation ; तोयस्य नास्ति वै नाशस्तदेव परिवर्त्तते।

3. The theory of the clouds is more fully detailed
in the Vayu, Linga, and Matsya Puranas : it is the
same in its general tenor, but comprises additional
circumstances. Clouds, according to those
authorities, are of three classes : 1. Agneya,
originating from fire or heat, or in other words,
evaporation : they are charged with wind and rain,
and are of various orders, amongst which are those
called Jimita, from their supporting life ; जीमूतास्ते
येभ्यो जीवसम्भवा:। 2, Brahmaja, born from the breath
of Brahm : these are the clouds whence thunder
and lightning proceed : and 3. Paksaja, or clouds
which were originally the wings of the mountains,
and which were cut off by Indra : these are also
termed Puskéravarttakas, from their including water
in their vortices : they are the largest and most
formidable of all, and are those which, at the end of
the Yugas and Kalpas, pour down the waters of the
deluge. The shell of the egg of Brahma, or of the
universe, is formed of the primitive clouds :

wed ter: प्रकीर्तिता:।

KKK
