406

THE VISNU-PURANAM

fata भाक्ष्यान्त्यब्दशतानि त्रीणि। No such name as Pauras
occurs in the other authorities. The analogy of
duration identifies them with the Mlecchas of the
Vayu : 'Eleven Mlecchas will possess the earth for
three centuries: शतानि त्रीणि भोक्ष्यन्ते म्लेच्छा एकादशैवतु।
and the Vayu may refer to the Maunas, as no other
period is assigned for them. The periods of the
Bhagavata, 1099 and 300, come much to the same
as that of our text, 1390; the one including the three
centuries of the Maunas, the other stating it
separately. The Vayu apparently adds it to the rest,
thus making the total 1601, instead of 1390. It is
evident that the same scheme is intended by the
several authorities, although ‘some inaccuracy
affects either the original statement or the existing
manuscripts.

66. Kilakila, Kolakila, Kolikila, Kilinakila, as it
is variously read. Sir Wm. Jones's Pandit stated that
he understood it to be a city in the Mahratta country
(As, Res. XI. 142); and there has been found a
confirmation of his belief in an inscription, where
Kilagila, as it is there termed, is called the capital of
Narasimha Deva, king of the Konkan, Journ, R. As.
Soc. Vol. IV. p. 282. This inscription dates A.D.
1088. The Puranas refer probably to a long
antecedent date, when the Greek princes or their
Indo-Scythic successors, following the course of
the Indus, spread to the upper part of the western
coast of the peninsula. The text calls them Yavanas;
and the Vayu and Matsya say they were Yavanas in
institutions, manners and policy ; धर्म्मत: कामतोऽर्थत:।

The Bhagavata names five of their princes,,

Bhitananda, Bangiri, Sisunandi, Yasonandi and
Pravira, who will reign 106 years and they are
therefore imperfect representatives of the series in
our text. The Matsya has no farthcr spccific
enumeration of any dynasty. The Vayu makes
Pravira the son of VindhyaSakti; the latter reigning
96 years and the former 60 : the latter is king of
K&ficanapuri, ‘the golden city' and is followed by
four sons, whose names are not mentioned.
Between Vindhyasakti and Pravira, however, a
dynasty of king is introduced, some of the names of
which resemble those of the Kilakila princes of the
text. They are, Bhogin the son of Sesanaga,
Sadacandra, Nakhavat, Dhanandhamita, Vingaja,
Bhitinanda—at a period before the end of the
Sungas? (the copies have शुंगाना न
pererd)—Madhunandi, his younger brother

NandiyaSas; and in his race there will be three other
Rajas, Dauhitra, Sisuka and Ripukayan. These are
called princes of VidiSa or Videsa; the latter
meaning perhaps 'foreign' and constitute the Naga
dynasty. Our text calls Vindhyasakti a
Murddhabhisikta, a warrior of a mixed race, sprung
from a Brahmana father and Ksatriya mother.

67. The text of this passage runs thus :
`वाह्लोकाश्चत्रयस्तत:। पुष्पमित्रपटुमि
त्राद्यास्त्रयोदशमेकलाश्च। ‘Their ऽ०5,` apt the

commentator explains by विन्ध्यशक्तयांदीनां यथायथं
त्रयोदशपुत्रा:। ‘thirteen sons of Vindhyasakti and the
rest.' The Bhagavata has a different statement,
identifying the sons of the Vindhya race with the
Bahlikas and making them thirteen ; तेषां त्रयोदशसुता
भवितारश्चबाह्लीका:। 'The Bahlikas will be their thirteen

sons.' As the commentator : भूतनन्दादीनां यथायथं
बाह्लीकनामानश्चत्रयोदशसुता भविष्यन्ति। ‘There will be
severally thirteen sons, called Bahlikas, of

Bhitananda and the rest.' The following verse is,
पुष्पमित्रो राजन्य: दुम्मित्रोऽथ तथैवच। 'Puspamitra, a king
and then Durmitra :` who or what they were does
not appear. The commentator says. Puspamitra was
another king and Durmitra was his son :
पुष्पमित्रोनामाऽन्यो राजन्योऽस्य च दुम्मित्रोनाम पुत्र:। Here is
evidently careless and inaccurate compilation. The
Vayu, though not quite satisfactory, accords better
with our text. 'Pravira', it says, 'will have four sons :
when the Vindhya race is extinct, there will be
three Bahlika kings, Supratika, Nabhira, who will
reign thirty years and Sakyamanabhava (quere this
name), king of the Mahisas. The Puspamitra will
then be and the Patumitras also, who will be seven
kings of Mekala. Such is the generation.’ 7
(प्रवीरस्य) पुत्रास्तु wart भविष्यन्ति नराधिपा:। विन्ध्यकानां
कलेऽतीते नृपा a बाह्लीकास्त्रय:। सुप्रतीको नभीरश्च समा भोक्ष्यन्ति
त्रिंशती:। शक्यमानाभवो राजा महिषीणां महीपति:। पुष्पमित्रा
भविष्यन्ति यदुमित्रास्तथैवच (or यदुमित्रास्त्रयोदश) मेकलायां नृपा:
wa भविष्यन्तीति सन्तति:॥ The plural verb with only two
Bahlika names indicates some omission, unless we
correct it to भोक्ष्येते `#ट४ two will reign;' but the
following name and title, Sakyamanabhava, king of
the Mahisas, seems to have little connection with
the Bahlika. If, in a subsequent part of the citation,
the reading 'trayodasa' be correct, it must then be
thirteen Patumitras, but it will be difficult to know
what to do with Sapta, 'seven'. If for Sartati we
might read Saptati, ‘seventy,’ the sense might be,
‘these thirteen kings ruled for seventy-seven years.'
