418

THE VISNU-PURANAM

3. This is a still farther diminution of Krsna’s
dignity; he is not even a part, but ‘a part of a part,’
Arhsamsavatéra (अंशाशांवतार:)। but this, 1९
commentator maintains, is to be understood only of
his from or condition as man, not of his power, as it
suffered no diminution, either in its primary or
secondary state, as light by suffusion suffers no
decrease; and a verse of the Veda is cited to this
effect : ‘Though that which is full be taken from
what is full, yet the remainder is undiminished ;’
पूर्णस्यपूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते। ‘Krsna is nevertheless the
very supreme Brahma, though it be a mystery how
the supreme should assume the form of a man; परं
ब्रह्म नराकृति परं गूढं परं ब्रह्म मनुष्यलिङ्गं कृष्णास्तु भगवानस्वयम्। So the
Bhagavata in one passage predicts that the Para-
purusa, Purusottama or Visnu, will be born visibly
in the dwelling of Vasudeva; वसुदेवगृहे साक्षाद्भगवान् Yea:
`पर: जनिष्यते।

4. The Bhagavata tells the circumstance as in
the text. The Hari Variisa makes Narada apprise
Karhsa of his danger. Narada’s interposition is not
mentioned until afterwards by our authority.
Devaki is the cousin of Karhsa : see Bk. iv. Ch. xv.

5. Agni or fire, refines gold, burns away the
dross, according to the commentator. The sun is the
lord of the rays of light; or, as the cause of rain and
vegetation, the lord of cattle. The phrase is, गवां

we: `परो गुरु:।

6. According to the Vayu, Kalanemi or
Kayabadha was a son of Virocana, the grandson of
Hiranyakasipu : his death is described in the Hari
Varhésa.

7. These appear subsequently in the narration
and are destroyed by Krsna.

8. Andmnaya (अनाम्नाय); not the immediate object
of the Vedas, which is devotion, not abstraction;
ritual or worship, not knowledge.

9. The two kinds of knowledge द्विविद्ये) are termed
Para (4a) ‘supreme,’ and Apara (#74), ‘other’ or
*subordinate , the first is knowledge of. Para

Brahma, of spirit abstractedly considered, perfect.

knowledge derived from abstraction; the second is
knowledge of Sabda Brahma, of spirit as described
and taught in the Vedas or their supplementary
branches. The identity of the supreme with both
descriptions of holy knowledge pervades the whole
of the address.

10. Para Brahma and Sabda Brahma : see the
preceding note.

11. The doctrine alluded to may be either
intended generally or in the several instances, the
discussion of the spiritual soul and living soul, of
body subtle and sensible and of matter endowed
with qualities, reference may be purposed to the
Vedanta, Yoga and Sarhkhya systems.

12. That is, as the Sabda Brahma, the supreme is
identical with philosophical doctrines, being the
object, the instigator and the result.

13. This is taken from the Vedas, the original of
which is quoted and translated by Jones : see his
Works. XIII. 368. The passage is thus cited by the
commentator on our text ; अपाणिपादी जवनो गृहीता
पश्यत्यचक्षु: स शरृणोत्यकर्ण: स वेत्ति वेद्य न च तस्य वेत्ता तमाहुरग्यं पुरुषं
महान्तं। ‘Without hand or foot he runs, he grasps;
without eyes he sees; and without ears he hears : he
know all that may be known and no one know him.
Him they call the first great spirit.’

14. Varenya ripa, explained by Paramananda
mirtti; he whose form or impersonation is Supreme
felicity.

15. Literally ‘navel of all ;’ त्वं विश्वनाभि:। The
passage is also read, त्वं विश्वमादि:। ‘Though are all and
the first ;’ the cause or creator.

16. Or the passage is understood, ‘Though are
one subsequently to Prakrti;? त्वमेक: प्रकृते: परस्तोत्।
that is, you are Brahma, the active will of the
supreme, creating forms from rudimental matter.

17. As the three fires enjoined by the Vedas and
the fire: metaphorically of devotion; or lightnings,
solar heat, fire generated artificially and the fire of
digestion or animal fire; or Visnu in that character
bestows beauty, vigour, power and wealth.

18. Prita one copy has Santa, ‘calm,’
‘undisturbed.’

19. Beyond the separate layers or envelopes of
elementary substances (see p. 18); or, according to
the Vedanta notions, uninvested by those grosser
sheaths or coverings, derived from food and the
like, by which subtle body is enclosed.

20. Mah4vibhiti sarhsthana एमिहाविभूतिसंस्थान)
Vibhiti is explained by Prapafica, sensible material
or elementary substance, constituting body.

21. The passage is somewhat obscurely
expressed and is differently interpreted; it is,
नाकारणात्कारणाद्वा कारणाकारणान्रच। “Not from no cause, nor
