50

THE VISNU-PURANAM

6. The story of Uma's birth and marriage occurs
in the Siva Purana and in the Kasi Khanda of the
Skanda Purana: it is noticed briefly, and with some
variation trom the Puranas, in the Ramayana, first
book: it is also given in detail io the Kumiara
Sambhava of Kalidasa.

7. The family of Bhrgu is more particularly
described in the tenth chapter: it is here mentioned
merely to introduce the story of the birth of the
goddess of prosperity, Sri.

aR OB OK

SACRIFICE OF DAKSA'
(From the Vayu Purana)

“There was formerly a peak of Meru, named
Savitra, abounding with gems, radiant as the sun.
and celebrated throughout the three worlds; of
immensc extent, and difficult of access, and an
object of universal veneration. Upon that glorious
eminence, rich with mineral treasures, as upon a
splendid couch, the deity Siva _ reclined,
accompanied by the daughter of the sovereign of
mountains, and attended by the mighty Adityas, the
powerful Vasus, and by the heavenly physicians,
the sons of Asvini; by Kuvera, surrounded by his
train of Guhyakas, the lord of the Yaksas, who
dwells on Kailaésa. There also was the great Muni
Usanas: there, were Rsis of the first order, with
Sanatkumara at their head; divine Rsis. preceded by
Angiras; Visvavasu, with his bands of heavenly
choristers; the sages Narada and Parvata; and
innumerable troops of celestial nymphs. The breeze
blew upon the mountain, bland, pure, and fragrant;
and the trees were decorated with flowers, that
blossomed in every season. The Vidyadharas and
Siddhas, affluent in devotion, waited upon
Mahadeva. the lord of living creatures; and many
other beings, of various forms, did him homage.
Raksasas of terrific semblance, and Pisaches of
great strength, of different shapes and features,
armed with various weapons, and blazing like fire.
were delighted to be present, as the followers of the
god. There stood the royal Nandi, high in the
favour of his lord, armed with a fiery trident,
shining with inherent lustre; and there the best of
rivers. Ganga. the assemblage of all holy waters,
stood adoring the mighty deity. Thus worshipped
by all the most excellent of sages and of gods,
abode the omnipotent and all-glorious Mahadeva.

"In former times, Daksa commenced a holy
sacrifice on the side of Himav4n, at the sacred spot
Gangadvara, frequented by the Rsia. The gods,
desirous of assisting at this solemn rite, came, with
Indra at their head, to Mahadeva. and intimated
their purpose; and having received his permission,
departed in their splendid chariots to Gangadvara.
as tradition reports”. They found Daksa, the best of
the devour, surrounded by the singers and nymphs
of heaven, and by numerous sages, beneath the
shade of clustering trees and climbing plants; and
all of them, whether dwellers on earth, in air, or in
the regions above the skies, approached the
patriarch with outward gestures of respect. The
Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Maruts, all entitled to
pareake of the oblations, together with Jisnu, were
present. The four classes of Pitrs, Ushmapas.
Somapas, Ajyapts, and Dhumapas, or those who
feed upon the name, the acid juice, the butter, or the
smoke of offerings, the Asvins and the progenitors,
came along with Brahmd. Creatures of every class,
born from the womb, the egg, from vapour, or
vegctation, came upon their invocation; as did all
the gods, with their brides, who in their resplendent
vehicles blazed like so many fires. Beholding them
thus assembled, the sage Dadhicha was filled with
indignation, and observed, ‘The man who worships
what ought not to be worshipped, or pays not
reverence where veneration is due, is gultcy, most
assuredly, of heinous sin.’ Then addressing Daksa,
he said to him, 'Why do you not offer homage to
the god who is the lord of life (Pasubhartri)?' Daksa
spoke; 'I have already many Rudras present, armed
with tridents, wearing braided hair, and existing in
eleven forms: | recognise no other Mahadeva.'
Dadhicha spoke; ‘Thc invocation that is not
addressed to Ia, is, for all, but a solitary (and
imperfect) summons. Inasmuch as I behold no
other divinity who is superior to Sankara, this
sacrifice of Daksa will not be completed.’ Daksa
spoke; “I offer, in a golden cup, this entire oblation,
which has been consecrated by many prayers, as an
offering ever due to the unequalled Visnu, the
sovereign lord of all.”

“In the meanwhile, the virtuous daughter of the
mountain king, observing the departure of the
divinities, addressed her lord. the god of living
beings, and said-—-Uma spoke— "Whither, oh lord,
have the gods, preceded by Indra, this day
