BOOK IV, 5 331

अथ स्वपते तस्मै Wa मामप्रत्याख्यायैतदनेन गौतमाय
कर्मान्तरमर्पितं यस्मात् facet भविष्यतीति शापं ददौ॥४॥

प्रतिबुद्धश्चासाववनीपतिरपि प्राह,- यस्मान्मामसम्भाष्य
अजानत Wa शयानस्य yr सर्गमसौ दुष्टगुरुश्चकार,
देहमत्यजत्॥५॥

The son of Iksvaku, who was named Nimi,!
instituted a sacrifice that was to endure for a
thousand years and applied to Vasistha to offer
the oblations. Vasistha in answer said, that he
had been pre-engaged by Indra for five
hundred years, but that if the Raja would wait
for some time, he would come and officiate as
superintending priest. The king made no
answer and Vasistha went away, supposing
that he had assented. When the sage had
completed the performance of the ceremonies
he had conducted for Indra, he returned with
all speed to Nimi, purposing to render him the
like office. When he arrived, however and
found that Nimi had retained Gautama and
other priests to minister at his sacrifice, he was
much displeased and pronounced upon the
king, who was then asleep, a curse to this
effect, that since he had not intimated his
intention, but transferred to Gautama the duty

CHAPTER 5 he had first entrusted to himself, Vasistha,
Usalseaa: Nimi should thenceforth cease to exist in a
corporeal form. When Nimi woke and knew

(निमियज्ञविवरणम्, सीताया उत्पत्ति:, what had happened, he in return denounced as
कुशध्वजवंशकथनञ्च) an imprecation upon his unjust preceptor, that

he also should lose his bodily existence, as the
पराशर उवाच punishment of uttering a curse upon him

Sea योऽसौ faftata, a q सहस्रवत्सरं eee tine bodily ccs ito him.
सन्रमारेभे, वशिष्ठञ्च होतारं वरयामास।। १ हं cs ono

we  sdeftastaigaaetdwaret: arora afta Ren
वृत:, तदन्तरं प्रतिपाल्यताम्, आगतस्तवापि ञल्विम्लेभे॥क्षा

भविष्यामि, इत्युक्ते स पृथिवीपतिना न किञ्चिदुक्त:।। २॥ निमेरपि हेरमतिमनोहरतैलगन्धादिभिरुपरि ।
वशिष्ठोऽप्यनेन समन्वीप्सिमित्यमरपतेर्यागमकरोत्॥ ३॥ dq क्लेदादिकं Gena, सद्योमृतमिव तस्थौ॥७॥
सोऽपि र्व्यच्चैर्व्य समाप्ते The spirit of Vasistha also leaving his

चामरपतेर्यागे त्वरावान् वशिष्टो निमे: कर्म्म body, was united with the spirits of Mitra and
करिष्यामीत्याजगाम, acters wT मौतमस्य epi, Varuna for a season, until, through their
