176

THE VISNU-PURANAM

abroad by his breath, and sheds perfume
around the skies.

यमाराध्य पुराणषिर्गर्गो ज्योतींषि तत्त्वत:।

ज्ञातवान् सकलञ्चैव निमित्तपठितं wer २६॥

तेनेयं नागवर्येण शिरसा विधृता मही।

बिभर्ति मालां लोकानां सदेवासुरमानुषाम्।। २७॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे पञ्चमोऽध्याय:।

The ancient sage Garga,” having propitiated
Sesa, acquired from him a knowledge of the
principles of astronomical science of the
planets, and of the good and evil denoted by
the aspects of the heavens. The earth,
sustained upon the head of this sovereign
serpent, supports in its turn the garland of the
spheres, along with their inhabitants, men,
demons and gods.

NOTES

1. In the Bhagavata and Padma P. they are
named Atala. Vitala, Sutala. Talatata, Mahatala,.
Rasatala and .Patala. The Wayu has Rasatala,
Sutala,. Vitala, Gabhastala, Mahitala, Sritala, and
Patala. There are other varieties.

2. Allusion is here made, perhaps, to the
description given in the Mahabharata. Udyoga
Parva, p. 218. of N&rada's and Ma§tali's visit to
Patala. Several of the particulars there given are not
noticed in the Puranas.

3. There is no very copious description of Patala .

in any of the Puranas. The most circumstantial are
those of the Vayu and Bhagavata; the latter has
been repeated, with some additions, in the first
chapters of the Patéta Khanda of the Padma Purana.
The Mahabharata and these two Puranas assign
different divisions to the Danavas, Daityas, and
Nagas, placing Vasuki and the other Naga chiefs in
the lowest : but the Vayu has the cities of the
principle Daityas and Nagas in each; as in the first
those of the Daitya Namuchi, and serpent Kaliya :
in the second, of Hayagriva and Taksaka : in the
third, of Prahlada and Hemaka; in the fourth, of
Kalanemi and Vainateya : in the fifth, of Hiranyaks
a and Kirmira ; and in the sixth, of Puloman and
Vasuki; besides others. Bali the Daitya is the
sovereign of Patala, according to this authority. The
Mahabharata places Vasuki in Rasatala, and calls
bis capital Bhogavati. The regions of Patala, and
their inhabitants, are oftener the subjects of

profane, than of sacred fiction, in consequence of
the frequent intercourse between mortal heroes and
the Naga-kanyis, or  serpent-nymphs. <A
considerable section of the Brhat Katha, the
Stryaprabha lambaka, consists of adventures and
events in this subter-raneous world.

4. Sesa is commonly described as being in this
situation : he is the great serpent on which Visnu
sleeps during the intervals of creation, and upon
whose numerous heads the world is supported. The
Puranas, making him one with Balarama or Sankars
ana, who is an impersonation or incarnation of Ses
a, blend the attributes of the serpent and the
demigod in their description,

5. With the Svastika, a particular diagram used
in mystical ceremonies.

6. One of the oldest writers on astronomy
amongst the Hindus. According to Bentley, his
Samhita dates 548 B. C. (Ancient Astron. of the
Hindus, p. 59.)

४९ ४९ ५९
