BOOK IV, 3

319

forests with his wives. One of these was
pregnant and being an object of jealously to a
rival queen, the latter gave her poison to
prevent her delivery. The poison had the effect
of confining the child in the womb for sever:
years. Bahu, having waxed old, died in the
neighbourhood of the residence of the Muni
Aurva. His queen having constructed his pile,
ascended it with the determination of
accompanying him in death; but the sage
Aurva, who knew all things, past, present and
to come, issued forth from his hermitage and
forbade her, saying, "Hold! hold! This is
unrighteous; a valiant prince, the monarch of
many realms, the offerer of many sacrifices,
the destroyer of his foes, a universal emperor,
is in your womb; think not of committing so
desperate an act!" Accordingly, in obedience
to his injunctions she relinquished her
intention.

तेनैव भगवता स्वाश्रममानीयत। कतिपयदिनान्तरे च सहैव
at गरेणातितेजस्वी बालको जज्ञे। तस्यौर्वो जातकर्म्मदिकां
क्रियां निष्पाद्य wat sft नाम चकार। कृतोपनयनञ्चैनमौर्वा
वेदान् शास्त्राण्यशेषाणि sas भार्गवाख्य-
मध्यापयामास।

The sage then conducted her to his abode
and after some time a very splendid boy was
there born. Along with him the poison that had
been given to his mother was expelled; and
Aurva, after pcrforming the ceremonies
required at birth, gave him on that account the
name of Sagara (from Sa, ‘with' and Gara,
‘poison'). The same holy sage celebrated his
investiture with the cord of his class,
instructed him fully in the Vedas and taught
him the use of arms, especially those of fire,
called after Bhargava.

उत्पन्नबुद्धिश्च मातरमपृच्छत्, अम्ब! कथमत्र वयम्? aq
वा तात:? तातोऽस्माकं क:? इत्येवमादि पृच्छत: तन्माता
सर्वमवोचत्। तत: पितृराज्यहरणामर्षितो हैहयताल-
जङ्घादिवधाय प्रतिज्ञामकरोत्। प्रायशश्च हैहयान् जघान।
शरणं ययु:॥ १८॥

अथैतान् वशिष्ठो जीवन्मृतकान् कृत्वा सगरमाह, ace!
aa! अलमेभिरतिजीवन्मृतर्करनृसृतै:। १९॥

When the boy had grown up and was
capable of reflection, he said to his mother one
day, "Why are we dwelling in this hermitage?
Where is my father? and who is he?" His
mother, in reply, related to him all that had
happened. Upon hearing which he was highly
incensed and vowed to recover his patrimonial
kingdom and exterminate the Haihayas and
Talajanghas, by whom it had been over-run.
Accordingly when he became a man he put
nearly the whole of the Haihayas to death and
would have also destroycd the Sakas, the
Yavanas, Kambojas, Paradas and Pahnavas',
but that they applied to Vasistha, the family
priest of Sagara, (or protection Vasistha
regarding them as annihilated (or deprived of
power), though living, thus spoke to Sagara:
"Enough, enough, my son, pursue no further
these objects of your wrath, whom you may
look upon as no more.

एते च मयैव त्वत्प्रतिज्ञापरिपालनाय निजधर्म्म
द्विजसङ्गपरित्यागं कारिता:॥२०॥

स तथेति तद्गुरुवचनमभिनन्द्य तेषां वेशान्यत्वमकारयत्।
पारदान्, Wd श्मश्रुधरान् नि:स्वाध्यायवषट्कारान्
एतानन्यांश्च क्षत्रियांश्चकार। ते च निजधर्म्मपरित्यागाद्
ब्राह्मणैश्च परित्यक्ता ered ययु:। सगरोऽपि
प्रशशास॥ 2 १॥

इति विष्णुपुराणे agaist तृतीय: अध्याय:।

In order to fulfil your vow I have scparated
them from affinity to the regenerate tribes and
from the duties of their castes.'° Sagara, in
compliance with the injunctions of his
spiritual guide, contented himself therefore
with imposing upon the vanquished nations
peculiar distinguishing marks. He made the
Yavanas shave (the upper) halt of their heads;
the Pdradas wore their hair long; and the

Pahnavas let their beards grow. In obedience
to his commands.'’ Then also and other Ks
