438

THE VISNU-PURANAM

किमयं मानुषो भावो व्यक्तमेवावलम्ब्यते।
Paley! सर्वगुह्यानां गुह्यगुह्यात्मना त्वया॥ २३॥

Krsna opened his mouth, smiling, for he
well knew the might of the son of Rohini and
replied, ‘‘Why this subtle pretext of merely
mortal nature? You who are the soul of all the
most subtle of subtle things.

स्मराशेषजगद्बीजकारणं कारणाग्रजम्।
आत्मानमेकं Tee जगत्येकार्णवे च a २४॥

Remember yourself, the radical cause of
the whole world; born before all cause and all
that is alone when the world is destroyed.

किन्न वेत्सि wes त्वञ्चैकं कारणं भुव:।
भारावतारणार्थाय मर्त्यलोकमुपागतौ॥ २५॥

Do you not know that you and I are alike
the origin of the world, who have come down
to lighten its load?

aa: शिरस्तेऽम्बुमयी च aft:
पादौ क्षितिर्वक्त्रमनन्तवह्नि:।
सोमो मनस्ते श्वसितं समीरो
दिशश्चतस्रोऽव्यय: !बाहवस्ते॥ २६॥
The heavens are your head; the waters are
your body; earth is your feet; your mouth is
eternal fire; the moon is your mind; the wind

your breath; your arms and hands are the four
regions cf space.

सहस्रवक्त्रो भगवान् महात्मा
सहस्रपद्मोद्भवयोनिराद्य:
सहस्रशस्त्वां PAA गृणन्ति।। २७॥
You have, O mighty lord, a thousand
heads, a thousand hands and feet and bodies; a
thousand Brahmas spring from you, who are

before all and whom the sages praise in
myriads of forms.

feat fe wt तव वेत्ति नान्यो
देवैरशेषैरवातररूपम्।
तवाच्चर्यते afta न fe यदन्ते
त्वय्येव विश्वं लयमभ्युपैति।। २८॥

No one but I know your divine person.
Your incarnate person is glorified by all the
gods. Know you not, that, at the end of all, the
universe disappears in you?

कृतादिभेदैरज। कालरूपो निमेषपूर्वो जगदेतदत्सि।। २९॥

That, upheld by you, this earth sustains
living and inanimate things? and that, in the
character of uncreated time, with its divisions
of ages, developed from an instant, you devour
the world?

अत्तं यथा वाडववह्निनाम्बु हिमस्वरूपं परिगृह्य कास्तम्।
हिमाचले भानुमतोऽशुसङ्गाज्जलत्वमभ्येति पुनस्तदेव।। ३०
एवं त्वया संहरणेऽत्तमेतज्जगत् समस्तं पुनरप्यवश्यम्।
AAT सर्गाय समुद्यतस्य जगत्त्वमभ्येत्यनुकल्पमीश।। ३ १

As the waters of the sea, when swallowed
up by submarine name, are recovered by the
winds and thrown, in the form of snow, upon
the Himdcala, where coming into contact with
the rays of the sun, they reassume their watery
nature’; so the world, being devoured by you
at the period of dissolution, becomes of
necessity, at the end of every Kalpa, the world
again, through your creative efforts.

wanes विश्वात्मन्नेकमेव fe कारणम्।
जगतोऽस्य जगत्यर्थे भेदेनावां व्यवस्थितौ॥ 3 २॥

a स्मर्य्यताममेयात्मन्! त्वयात्मा wie दानवम्।
मानुष्यमेवावलम्ब्य बन्धूनां क्रियतां हितम्।। ३३॥

You and I, soul of the universe, are but one
and the same cause of the creation of the earth,
although, for its protection, we exist in distinct
individuals. Calling to memory who though
are, O being of illimitable might, destroy of
yourself the demon. Suspending awhile your
mortal character, do what is right.”

पराशर उवाच
sft संस्मारितो विप्र! कृष्णेन सुमहात्मना।
विहस्य पीडायामास प्रलम्बं बलवान् बल:।॥ ३४॥
मुष्टिना चाहननमूदध्नि कोपसंरक्तलोचन:।
तेन चास्य प्रहारेण afeate विलोचने।। ३५॥
