BOOK IV, 19

379

Suhotra” ,» Whose son was Hastin, who
founded the city of Hastinapur.” The son of
Hastin were Ajamidha,”° Dvimidha and
Purumidha. One son of Ajamidha was Kanva,
whose son was Medhatithi;”° his other son was
Brhadisu, whose son was Brhadvasu;”’ his son
was Brhatkarman;” his son was Jayadratha;””
his son was Visvajit;” his son was Senajit,
whose sons were  Rucirasva, Kasya,
Drdhadhanus and Vasahanu.*! The son of
Rucirasva was Prthusena; his son was Para; his
son was Nipa; he had a hundred sons, of whom
Samara, the principal, was the ruler of
Kampilya.” Samara had three sons, Para,
Sampara, Sadasva.

समरस्यापि पार-सम्पार-सदश्नास्त्रय: पुत्रा:! पारात् पृथु:,
पृथो: सकृति:) सुकृतेर्विभ्राज:, ays: स च
शुकदुहितरं Sit नामोपयेमे।। १२॥

अनुहाद् ब्रह्मदत:) ततो विष्वक्सेन:, तस्योदकसेन:,
ततो भल्लाट:, तस्यात्मजो द्विमीढ:, द्विमीढस्य यवीनरसंज्ञ:,
तस्मापि धृतिमान्, तत: सत्यधृति:, ततश्च दृढ्नेमि:, तस्माच्च
gud: तत:, सुमति:, ततश्य सन्नतिमान्, सन्नतिमत:),
कृतोऽभूत। यं हिरण्यनाभो योगमध्यापयामास, यश्चतुविंशतिं
प्राच्यसामगानां चकारं संहिता:।। १३॥

The son of Para was Prthu; his son was
Sukrti; his son was Vibhratra;? his son was
Anuha, who married Krtvi, the daughter of
Suka (the son of Vyasa) and had by her
Brahmadatta:** his son was Visvaksena; his
son was Udaksena;** and his son was Bhallat
a.

The son of Dvimidha®” was Yavinara; his
son was Dhrtimat;* his son was Satyadhrti;
his son was Drdhanemi; his son was
Suparsva;”” his son was Sumati; his son was
Sannatimat; his son was Krta, to whom
Hiranyanabha taught the philosophy of the
Yoga and he compiled twenty-four Samhitas
(or compendia) for the use of the eastern
Brahmanas, who study the Samaveda.”

कृताच्चोग्रायुध: येन wreyetor नृपक्षय: कृत:॥१४॥
उग्रायुधात् क्षेम्य: तस्मात् YaR:, तस्य नृपञ्जय:, ततो
aga) इत्येते पौरवा:। अजमीढस्य नीलिनी, नाम weit,

तस्यां नीलसंज्ञ: पुत्रोऽभवत्। तस्मादपि शान्ति:, शान्ते:
सुशान्ति:; Get: पुरुजानु: ततश्चक्षु:), ad हर्य्यश्च:)
तस्माद् मुद्गलसृञ्जय-बृहदिषु-प्रवीर-काम्पिल्या:।
पञ्चानामेतेषां विषयाणां रक्षणायालमेते मत्पुत्रा:) sft
पित्राभिहिता:, अतस्ते पाञ्चाला:।। १५॥

मुद्गलाच मौद्गल्या: क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातयो बभूवु:।
मुद्गलाद् वृद्धश्च:) Feu दिवोदास:) अहल्या च
मिथुनमभूत्। शरद्वतोऽहल्यायां शतानन्दोऽभवत्। शतानन्दात्
सत्यधृति: धनुर्वदान्तगो जज्ञे! सत्यधृतेस्तु वराप्सरसमुर्व्वशीं
GSAT रेत:स्कन्नं शरस्तम्बे पपात।। १६॥

wa द्विधागतमपत्यद्दयं HI: कन्यका च अभवत्।
मृगयामुपागत: शान्तनुर्दृष्टवा कृपया जग्राह।। १७॥

तत: स कुमार: कृप:, कन्या चाश्वत्थाम्नो जननी कृपी
द्रोणपत्न्यभवत्।

The son of Krta was Ugrayudha, by whose
prowess the Nipa race of Ksatriyas was
destroyed;*! his son was Ksemya; his son was
Suvira, his son was Nrpafijaya;* his son was
Bahuratha. These were called Pauravas.

Ajamidha had a wife called Nilini and by
her he had a son named Nila; his son was
Santi; his son was Susanti; his son was
Purujanu;” his son was Caksu;“ his son was
Haryyasva,** who had five sons, Mudgala,
Sriijaya,”° Vrhadisu, Pravira*” and Kampilya.*
Their father said, "These my five (pafica) sons
are able (alam) to protect the countries;" and
hence they were termed the Paficdlas.” From
Mudgala descended ९ Maudgalya
Brahmanas;” he had also a son named
Bahvasva,! who had two children, twins, a
son and daughter, Divodisa and Ahalyd. The
son of Satadvat of Gautama by Ahalyd was
Satananda;** his son was Satyadhrti, who was
a proficient in military science. Being
enamoured of the nymph Urvasi, Satyadhrti
was the parent of two children, a boy and girl.
Santanu, a Raja, while hunting, found these
children exposed in a clump of long Sara
grass; and compassionating their condition,
took them and brought them up. As they were
nurtured through pity (krp4), they were called
