THE VISNU-PURANAM

510
CHAPTER 35
पञ्चत्रिशोऽध्याय:
(कृष्णापुत्र-शाम्बस्य विवाह:।)
मैत्रेय उवाच

भूय एवाहमिच्छामि बलभद्रस्य धीमत:।

श्रोतुं पराक्रमं ब्रह्मन्! तन्ममाख्यातुमर्हसि।। aI

यमुनाकर्षणादीनि श्रुतानि भगवन्मया।

तत् कथ्यतां महाभात! यदन्यत् HAA बल:।॥ Vl

Maitreya said— I have a great desire to hear,

excellent Brahman, some further account of
the exploits of Balarama. You have related to
me his dragging the Yamuna, and other
mighty deeds, but you can tell me, venerable
sir, some other of nis acts.
षराशर उवाच

Ara! श्रूयतां wat ae रामेणाभवत् कृतम्।

अनन्तेनाप्रमेयेण HAUT धरणीभृता।। ३॥

galery तनयां स्वयंवरकृतक्षणाम्।

बलादादत्तवान् वीर: शाम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत:॥४॥

तत: क्रुद्धा महावीर्या: wot: दुर्योधनादय:।

भीष्म-द्रोणादयश्चैव बबन्धुर्युधि निर्जितम्॥ ५॥

Parasara said~ Attend, Maitreya, to the
achievements performed by Rama, who is the
eternal, illimitable Sesa. the upholder of the

earth. At the choise of a husband by the
daughter of Duryodhana, the princess was
carried off by the hero Samba. the son of
Jambavati. Being pursued by Duryodhana,
Karna. Bhishma. Drona, and other celebrated
chiefs, who were incensed at his audacity, he
was defeated, and taken prisoner.

तच्छुत्वा यादवा: सर्वे क्रोधं दुर्योधनादिषु।

भैत्रेय। चक्रुश्च wat निहन्तुं ते महोद्यमम् ॥६॥

तान् निवार्य्य बल: प्राह मदलोलाकुलाक्षरम्।
मोक्ष्यन्ति ते मद्दचनाद् यास्याम्येको fe कौरवान्॥७॥

When the Yadavas heard of the occurrence,
their wrath was kindled against Duryodhana
and his associates, and they prepared to take
up arms against them; but Baladeva, in accents
interrupted by the effects of ebriety. forbade
them. and said, “I will go alone to the sons of
Kuru; they will liberate Samba at my request.

WA उवाच
बलदेवस्ततो गत्वा नगरं नागसाह्वयम्।
बाह्येपवनमध्येऽभूद् न विवेश च ATTN ८॥
बलमागतमाज्ञाय भूपा दुर्योधनादय:।
गामर्ध्यमुदकञ्चैव रामाय प्रत्यवेदयन्।। ९॥
गृहीत्वा विधिवत् सर्वं ततस्तानाह कौरवान्।
आज्ञापयत्युग्रसेन: शाम्बमाशु विमुञ्चत।। १०॥

ParaSara said— Accordingly he went to the
elephant-styled city (Hastinapura).but took up
his abode in a grove without the town. which
he did -not enter. When Duryodhana and the
rest heard that he had arrived there they sent
him a cow, a present of fruits and flowers, and
water. Bala received the offering in the
customary form, and said to the Kauravas,
"Ugrasena commands you to set Simba at
liberty.”

ततस्ते तद्वच: श्रुत्वा भीष्पद्रोणादयो द्विज।
कर्णदुर्य्यधनाद्याश्च चुक्रुधर्दविजसत्तम।। ११॥
ऊचुश्च कुपिता: wa बाहूलीकाद्याश्च कौरवा:।

अराज्यार्हं यदोर्वंशमवेक्ष्य मुसलायुधम्॥ १२॥

भो भो। किमेतद्भवता बलभद्रेरितं वच:।
