500

THE VISNU-PURANAM

endowed with subtlety of discernment. You
are that you are, engaged in the active
preservation of the earth; you extractest the
thorns implanted in her bosom, destroyer of
the demon race. Let this Parijita tree be
transferred to Dvdrakd, and it shall remain
upon earth as long as you abidest in the world
of mortals.”

तथेत्युक्त्वा त देवेन्द्रमाजगाम yt हरि:।

प्रसक्तै: सिद्ध-गन्धर्वे: स्तूयमानस्तथर्षिभि:।। ८।।

Hari, having assented to the proposal of

Indra, returned to earth, hymned by attendant
sage, Saints, and quiristers of heaven.

तत: शङ्खमुपाध्माय द्वारकोपरि संस्थित:।
हर्षमुत्पादयामास द्वारकावासिनां द्विज:॥९॥
अवतीर्थ्यथ गरुडात् सत्यभामासहायवान्।
निष्कुटे स्थापयामास पारिजातं महातरुम्।। १०॥
यमभ्येत्य जन: सर्वो जातिं स्मरति पौर्विकीम्।
वास्यते यस्य पुष्पोत्थगन्धेनोर्वीं त्रियोजनम्।। ११॥
ततस्ते सादरा: GA देहबन्धानमानुषान्।

ददृशु: पादपे तस्मिन् कुर्वन्तो मुखदर्शनम्।। १२॥

When Krsna arrived over Dvaraka, be blew
his shell, and delighted all the inhabitants with
the sound. Then alighting from Garuda, he
proceeded with Satyabhama to her garden, and
there planted the great Parijdta tree, the smell
of which perfumed the earth for three furlongs,
and an approach to which enabled every one to
recollect the events of a prior existence; so
that on beholding their faces in that tree, all

the Yadavas contemplated themselves in their
(original) celestial forms.

fagt: समुपानीतं हस्त्यश्वादि ततो धनम्।

स्रियश्च कृष्णो जग्राह नरकस्य UTE १३॥
तत: काले शुभे प्राप्ते उपयेमे जनार्द्दन:।

ता: कन्या ACH सर्वतो या: समाहता:॥ १४॥
एकस्मिन्नेव गोविन्द: काले तासां महामते।

जग्राह विधिवत् पाणीन् पृथग्गेहेषु धर्म्मत:॥ १५॥

Then Krsna took possession of the wealth,
elephants, horses, and women, which he had
recovered from Naraka, and which had been

brought to Dvaraka by the servants of the
demon; and at an auspicious season he
espoused all the maidens whom Naraka had
carried off from their friends; at one and the
same moment he received the hands of all of
them, according to the ritual, in separate
mansions.

षोडशस्त्रीसहस्राणि शतमेकं तथाधिकम्।

तावन्ति चक्रे रूपाणि भगवान् मधुसूदन।। १६॥

एकैकश्येन ता: कन्या मेनिरे मधुसूदन्।

ममैव पाणिग्रहणं भगवान् कृतवानिति।। १७॥

निशासु च जगत्स्रष्टा तासां Tey केशव:।

sare विप्र! सर्वासां विश्वरूपधरो हरि:। १८॥

४

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे एकत्रिश: अध्याय:॥ ३ १॥

Sixteen thousand and one hundred was the
number of the maidens, and into so many
different forms did the foe of Madhu multiply
himself; so that every one of the damsels
thought that he had wedded her in his single
person; and the creator of the world, Hari, the
assumer of universal shape, abode severally in
the dwelling of each of these his wives.

KEE
