232 THE VISNU-PURANAM

Visvaksena. The Bhagavata called the two last always considered as consentaneous with the day

Manus, Deva-savarni and Indra-savarni. and night of Brahma alone.
9. Hence the Vayu identifies the first with days, 15. As a Cakravarttin.
the second with nights and the third with hours. । 20%

10. The son of the Prajapati Ruci (Vayu), by the
nymph Manini, the daughter of the Apsaras
Pramaloca (Markandeya).

11. Son of Kavi, by the goddess, Bhiiti,
according to the Vayu; but the Markandeya makes
Bhiti the son of Angiras, whose pupil Santi, having
suffered the holy fire to got out in his master's
absence, prayed to Agni and so propitiated him,
that he not only re-lighted the flame, but desired `
Santi to demand a further boon. Santi accordingly
solicited a son for his Guru; which son was Bhiuti,
the father of the Manu Bhautya.

12, Although the Puranas which give an account
of the Manvantaras agree in some of the principal
details, yet in the minor ones they offer many
varieties, some of which have been noticed, These
chiefly regard the first six and the eighth. Except in
a few individual peculiarities, the authorities seem
to arrange themselves in two classes; one
comprehending the Visnu, Vayu, Karma,
Bhagavata and Markandeya; and the other the
Matsya, Padma, Brahma and Hari Varhsa. The
Markandeya, although it agrees precisely with the
Visnu in its nomenclature, differs from it and from
all, in devoting a considerable number of its pages
to legends of the origin of the Manus, all of which
are evidently of comparatively recent invention and
several of which have been no doubt suggested by
the etymology of the names of the Manus.

13. A thousand ages of the gods and fourteen
Manvantaras are not precisely the same thing, as
has been already explained. (See Bk. I. Ch. III, n.
6.)

14. The order of the text would imply, that as
Brahma he sleeps upon Sega; but if this be
intended, it is at variance with the usual legend, that
it is as Visnu or Narayana that the deity sleeps in
the intervals of dissolution. The commentator
accordingly qualifies the phrase Brahmaripadhara
(ब्रह्मरूपधर) by the term Diva (fea) ; 'Visnu wears the
form of Brahma by day; by night he sleeps on Sega,
in the person of Narayana : श्रीनारायणरूपेण शेषाहौ
Wal This however may be suspected to be an
innovation upon an older system; for in speaking of
the alternations of creation and dissolution, they are
