518

was sitting at the root of a tree. they beheld a
large serpent coming out of his mouth. Having
issued from his mouth, the mighty snake pro-
ceeded towards the ocean, hymned by saints
and by other great serpents. Bringing an
offering of respect. Ocean came to meet hi:n;
and then the majestic being, adored by
attendant snakes, entered into the waters of the
deep.

दृष्टवा बलस्य Fratot दारुकं wre केशव:।

इदं wes त्वमाचक्ष्व वसुदेवोग्रसेनयो:॥ ५ २॥

निर्याणं बलभद्रस्य यादवानां तथा क्षयम्।

any स्थित्वाहमप्येतं परित्यक्षे कलेवरम् ॥५३॥

Beholding the departure of the spirit of
Balabhadra. Kesava said to Daruka, “All. this
is to be related by you to Vasudeva and
Ugrasena. Go and inform them of the
departure of Balabhadra, and the destruction
of the Yddavas; also that | shall engage in
religious meditation, and quit this body.

वाच्यश्च द्वारकावासिजन: सर्वस्तथाहुक:।
`यथेमां नगरीं सर्वां समुद्र: प्लावयिष्यति॥ ५४॥
तस्माद्भवद्भि: सर्वैस्तु प्रतीक्ष्यो ह्यर्जुनागम:।

न स्थेयं द्वारकामध्ये निष्क्रान्ते तत्र पाण्डवे।। ५५॥
तेनैव सह गन्तव्यं यज्ञ याति स कौरव:।

गत्वा च ब्रूहि कौन्तेयमर्जुनं वचनान्मम।। ५६॥
पालनीयस्त्वया शक्त्या जनोऽयं मत्परिग्रह:।

इत्यर्जुनेन सहितो द्वारवत्या भवान् जनम्।
गृहीत्वा यातु वज्रश्च यदुराज्येऽभिषिच्यताम्॥ ५७॥

Apprise Ahuka and all the inhabitants of
Dvaraka,"? that the sea will inundate the town:
be ready therefore in expectation of the
coming of Arjuna. and when he quits Dvaraka,
no longer abide there, but go whither so ever
that descendant of Kuru shall repair. Do you
also go to the son of Kuru, and tell him, that it
is my request that he will grant what
protection he can to‘all my family. Then
depart with Arjuna and all the people of
Dvaravati, and let Vajra be installed sovereign
over the tribe of Yadu.”

THE VISNU-PURANAM
पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्तो दारुक: HOT प्रणिपत्य YA: पुन:।
प्रदक्षिणञ्च बहुश: कृत्वा प्रायाद् यथोदितम्॥५८॥
OTST च तथा चक्रे द्वारकायां तथार्जुनम्।

आनिनाय महाबुद्धिर्वज्रं चक्रे तथा नृपम्॥५९॥

Daruka, being thus instructed, prostrated
himself again and again before Krsna, and
walked round him repeatedly, and then
departed as he had been desired; and having
conducted Arjuna to Dvardavati, the intelligent
servant of Krsna established Vajra as king.

भगवानपि गोविन्दो वासुदेवात्मकं परम्।

ब्रह्मात्मनि समारोप्य सर्वभूतेष्वधारयत्।। ६०॥

सम्मानयन् द्विजवचो दुर्वासा यदुवाच ह।

योगयुक्तोऽभवत् पादं HAT जानुनि सत्तम:।।६१॥

The divine Govinda then, having
concentrated in himself that supreme spirit:
which is one with Vasudeva. was identified
with all beings.'* Respecting the words of the
Brahman, the imprecation of Durvasas,’” the
illustrious Krsna sat engaged in thought,
resting his foot upon his knee.

आययौ च जरानाम स तदा तत्र लुब्यक:।
मुसलावशेषलोह-सायकन्यस्ततोमर:॥ ६ २॥
स तं पादं मृगाकारमवेक्ष्यारादवस्थित:।

ae विव्याध तेनैव तोमरेण द्विजोत्तम।। ६३॥
गतश्च ददृशे तत्र चतुर्बाहुधरं नरम्।
प्रणिपत्याह चैवैनं प्रसीदेति पुन: पुन:।।६४॥
अजानत्ता कृतमिदं यदा हरिणशङ्कया।
क्षम्यतामात्मपापेन दग्धं मा दग्धुमर्हसि।। ६५॥

Then came there a hunter, named Jara'®
whose arrow was tipped with a blade made of
the piece of iron of the club, which had not
been reduced to powder; and beholding from a
distance the foot of Krsna, he mistook it for
part of a deer, and shooting his arrow, lodged
it in the sole.'’ Approaching his mark, he saw
the four-armed king, and falling at his feet,
repeatedly besought his forgiveness,
