106

THE VISNU-PURANAM

19. There is some, though not much. variation in
these names in different Puranas. The Bhagavata
has Sarama. Kashtha, and Timi, the parents
severally of canine animals, beasts with uncloven
hoofs, and fishes, in place of Vinataé, Khasd, and
Kadru; disposing of the first and last differently.
The Vayu has Prava in place of Arishta. and
Andyus or Dénayus for Surasé. The Padma Purana,
second leries, substitutes Kali, Anayus Sinhika,
Pisacha, Vach for Arishta, Surasa, Suravi. Tamra,
and Muni; and omits Ida and Khas. In the Uttara
Khanda of the same. Kasgyapa's wives are said to be
but four, Aditi, Diti. Kadru and Vinata.

20. In the sixth reign, or that of Chaksusa Manu,
according to the text; but in book III.. ch. I. the
Tushitas are the gods of the second or Sv4rochisa
Manvantara. The Vayu has a much more complete
legend than any other Purana on this subject. In the
beginning of the Kalpa twelve gods, named Jayas.
were created by Brahma, as his deputies and
assistants in the creation. They, lost in meditation,
neglected his commands : on which he cursed them
to be repeatedly born in each Manvantara till the
seventh. They were accordingly, in the several
successive Manvantaras, Ajitas, Tusitas. Satyas,
Haris, Vaikunthas, Sadhyas, and Adityas. Our
authority and some others, as the Brahma, have
apparent’ ly intended to refer to this account, bul
have confused the order of the series.

21. The Puranas that contain this genealogy
agree tolerably well in these names. The Bhagavata
adds many details regarding some of the Adityas
and their descendants.

22. The Naksutra Yoginis. or chief stars of the
lunar mansions, or asterisms in the moon's path.

23. None of the authorities are more specific on
the subject of Aristanemis' progeny. In the
Mahabharata this is said to be another name of
Kasyapa : We: कश्यप: पुत्रस्तस्य द्वे नामनी स्मृते।

येकॆ कश्यपेत्यपरं विदु:।॥। The Bhagavata
substitutes Tarksa for this personage, said by the
commentator to be likewise another name of
KaSyapa. His wives are. Kadru, Vinaté. Patangi,
and Yamini. mothers of snakes, _ birds,
grasshoppers, and locusts.

24, Enumerated in astrological works as brown,
red, yellow, and white; portending severally wind,
heat, rain, famine.

25. The Rihas, or verses, thirty-five in number,
addressed to presiding divinities, denominated
Pratyangirasas. The Bhagavata calls the wives of
Angiras, Svadhé and Sati. and makes them the
mothers of the Pitrs and the Atharvan Veda
severally.

26. The Sastra devatas, ‘gods of the divine
weapons :' a hundred are enumerated in the
Ramayana. and they are there termed the sons of
Krisva by Jayé and Vijaya, daughters of the
Prajapati; that is, of Daksa. The Bhagavata terms
the two wives of Krisaswa, Arcis (flame) and Dhis
ana; the former is the mother of Dhimaketu
(comet); the latter, of four sages, Devala,
Vedagiras, Vayuna. and Manu. The allegorical
origin of the weapons is undoubtedly the more
ancient.

27. This number is founded upon a text of the
Vedas, which to the eight Vasus. eleven Rudras,
and twelve Adityas. adds Prajapati, either Brahma
or Daksa, and Vasatkara ‘deified oblation अष्टौ aaa
एकदाश रुद्रा द्वादशादित्या: प्रजापतिर्वषट्कारश्चेति श्रुत्युक्ता:। They
have the epithet Chhandaja, as born in different
Manvantaras, of their own will : छन्दत: स्वेच्छातो जायन्ते
छन्दजा:।

28. The Puranas generally concur in_ this
genealogy, reading sometimes Anuhrada. Hrada,
etc. for Anuhlada and the rest. Although placed
second in the order of Kasyapa's descendants, the
Daityas are in fact the elder branch. Thus the
Mahabharata, Moksa Dharma, calls Diti the senior
wife of Kasyapa : तासां ज्येष्ठाभवद्दिति: | and the Vayu
terms Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa the eldest of
all the sons of that patriarch:
सर्व्वभ्य: पूर्व्वजौ स्मृतौ। So, “Titan and his enormous
brood” were “heaven's first born.”

५९४९ १९ %
