532

THE VISNU-PURANAM

NOTES

1. Two kinds of great or universal dissolution are
here intimated; one occurring at the end of a Kalpa,
or day of Brahma, to which the term Upasanhriti is
applied in the text, and Atyantika laya by the
commentator; and the other taking place at the end
of the life of Brahma, which is termed a great or
elemental dissolution: Maha pralaya and Prakrta
pralaya.

2. These measures of time are more fully
detailed in the first book: see Bk. I. Ch. III.

3. This is an allusion to a popular notion,
originating probably with Manu: “In the Krta age
the genius of truth and right stands firm on his four
feet; but in the following ages he is deprived
successively of one foot,” etc. I. 81, 82.

4. ‘Such an act is just what it is;? ada
प्रायश्चित्तक्रिया कलौ। that is, it may be attended by
inconvenience to the individual, but is utterly
inefficacious for the expiation of sin.

5. Whether it is conformable or contradictory to
the Vedas and the law. The passage may be
rendered also, ‘The doctrine or dogma of any one
soever will be scripture.’

6. He will not part with the half of the half of
half a Pana; that is, with ten Cowries; a Pana being
equal to eighty Cowries, or small shells. Five Panas
are equal to one Ana, or the sixteenth of a Rupee;
and, at two shillings the Rupee, ten Cowries are
equal to about one-seventh of a farthing.

7. They will be valued for their individual use
only, not from any notion of their generic sanctity.

8. The Bhagavata has, “Religious students will
be regardless of vows and _ purification;
householders will beg, not give alms; anchorets will
dwell in villages; and mendicants will be desirous
of riches.”

9. That is, princes and warriors will be so on
longer by virtue of their birth and caste.

10. Most of the mendicant orders admit members
without distinction of caste; but probably Buddhists
especially are here intended. The Bhagavata
repeatedly alludes to the diffusion of heretical
doctrines and practices, the substitution of outward
signs and marks for devotion, and the abandonment
of the worship of Visnu. The Saiva mendicant
orders are probably those especially in view. The
same probably are intended by our text in the
subsequent allusion to unauthorized austerities, and
sectarial marks.

11. ‘Gavedhuka (Coix barbata) and other bad
sorts of grain.” गवेधुकाकदान्नाद्यान् देशान्। Another
reading is, गोधूमान् यवान्नाद्यान्। ‘Countries growing
wheat, barley and the like.’ But to place wheat and
barley amongst inferior grains, and to rank them
lower than rice, is a classification that could have
occurred to a native of Bengal alone.

12. The Vayu says three and twenty; the
Bhagavata, from twenty to thirty.

13. The complaints of the prevalence of
heterodox doctrines, and neglect of the practices of
the Vedas, which recur in the Bhagavata and our
text, indicate a period of change in the condition of
the Hindu religion, which it would be important to
verify. If reference is made to Buddhism, to which
in some respects the allusions especially apply, it
would probably denote a period not long
subsequent to the Christian era; but it is more likely
to be of a later date, or in the eighth and ninth
centuries, when Sankara is said to have reformed a
variety of corrupt practices, and given rise to
others, See As. Res. vol. XVI. p. 12.

14. Crotolaria juncea.

15. The silk cotton, Bambax heptaphylla.

16. The expression Kvacit-lokah (afaete:), ‘a
certain place’, is explained by the commentator,
Kikata, etc. ( ); confirming the inference
that Buddhism is especially aimed at in the
previous passages; for Kikata, or south Behar, is the
sense of Sakya’s earliest and most successful
labours.

17. Several of the Puranas contain allusions to
the degeneracy of the Kali age, but none afford
more copious details. The description in the
Bhagavata is much shorter; that of the Vayu is
much the same, and employs many of the same
verses and illustrations.

18. This might be suspected of being said
ironically, referring to what had been just observed
of places where a religion prevailed that required
neither study nor sacrifice. The commentator,
however, understands it literally, and asserts that
allusion is here made to the Vaisnava faith, in
which devotion to Visnu or Krsna, and the mere
repetition of his names, are equally efficacious in
the Kali age with the penances and sacrifices of the
preceding ages: therefore he concludes the Kali, by
this one property, is the best of all the ages:
wr कलि: सर्वश्रेष्ठ: इत्यर्थ:। This interpretation is
confirmed by the following chapter.
