BOOK II, CHAP. 15

217

CHAPTER 15
पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:
(ॠभु-निदाघसंवाद:)
पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्ते मौनिनं भूयश्चिन्तयानं महीपतिम्।
प्रत्युवाचाथ विप्रोऽसावद्वैतान्तर्गतां कथाम्॥ १
Parasara continued— Having terminated
these remarks, the Brahmana repeated to the

silent and meditating prince a tale illustrative
of the doctrines of unity.

ब्राह्मण sara

श्रूयतां Toe! यद्गीतमृभुणा पुरा।
अवबोधं जनयता निदाघस्य महात्मन:।। २॥
ऋभुर्नामाभवत् पुत्रो ब्रह्मण: परमेष्ठिन:।
विज्ञाततत्त्वसद्भावो निसर्गादेव suai ३॥
तस्य शिष्यो निदाघोऽभूत् पुलस्त्यतनय: पुरा।
प्रादादशेषविज्ञानं स तस्मै परया Fats
अवाप्तज्ञानतत्त्वस्य न तस्याद्वैतवासनाम्।

स ऋभुस्तर्कयामास निदाघस्य नरेश्वर।। ५॥

Brahmana said— “Listen, prince,’ he
proceeded, “to what was formerly uttered by
Rbhu, imparting holy knowledge to the
Brahmana Nidagha. Rbhu was a son of the
supreme Brahma, who, from his innate
disposition, was of a holy character, and
acquainted with true wisdom. Nidagha, the son
of Pulastya, was his disciple; and to him Rbhu
communicated willingly perfect knowledge,
not doubting of his being fully confirmed in
the doctrines of unity, when he had been thus
instructed.

देविकायास्तटे वीरनगरं नाम वै पुरम्।
समृद्धमतिरम्यं च पुलस्त्येन निवेशितम्॥६॥

रम्योपवनपर्यन्ते स तस्मिन् पार्थिवोत्तम।

निदाघो नाम योगज्ञ ऋभुशिष्योऽवसत् TAT!
fea वर्षसहस्रे तू समतीतेऽस्य तत्पुरम्।
जगाम स ऋभु: शिष्यं निदाघमवलोकक:।। ८॥
स तस्य वैश्वदेवान्ते द्वारालोकनगोचरे।
स्थितस्तेन year निजवेश्म प्रवेशित:॥ ९॥
प्रक्षालिताङ्खिपाणि च कृतासनपरिग्रहम्।

उवाच स द्विजश्रेष्ठो भुज्यतामिति सादरम्॥ १०॥

The residence of Pulastya was at
Viranagara, a large handsome city on the
banks of the Devika river. In a beautiful grove
adjoining to the stream the pupil of Rbhu,
Nidagha, conversant with devotional practices,
abode. When a thousand divine years had
elapsed, Rbhu went to the city of Pulastya, to
visit his disciple. Standing at the doorway, at
the end of a sacrifice to the Visvadevas, he
was seen by his scholar, who hastened to
present him the usual offering, or Arghya, and
conducted him into the house; and when his
hands and feet were washed, and he was
seated, Nidagha invited him respectfully to eat
(when the following dialoguc ensued):

ऋभुरुवाच
भो विप्रवर्य्य! भोक्तव्यं यदन्नं भवतो गृहे।
WL कथ्यतां कदन्नेषु न प्रीति: सततं मम।। ११॥
Rbhu, ‘Tell me, illustrious Brahmana, what

food there is in your house; for I am not fond
of indifferent viands.’

निदाघ sara

भक्त-यावक-वाट्यानामपूपानाञ्च मे गृहे।
ae रोचते द्विजश्रेष्ठ! aq त्वं eRe यथेच्छया।। १२॥
“Nidagha, ‘There are cakes of meal, rice,
barley, and pulse in the house; partake,
venerable sir, of whichever best please you.’

ऋभुरुवाच
meat द्विजैतानि मृष्टमन्नं प्रयच्छ मे।
संयाव-पायसादीनि द्रप्स्यफाणितवन्ति च॥ १३॥
