BOOK IV, 20

CHAPTER 20
विंशोऽध्याय:
(कुरुवंशरर्णनम्)
पराशर उवाच
पुत्रा:।। il
जह्नोस्तु सुरथो नामात्मजो बभूव।। २॥
सार्वभौमाज्जयसेन:) तस्मादारावी। ततश्चायुतायु:,
अयुतायोलक्रोधन:, तस्माद् देवातिथि: ततश्च
ASAT BN
ऋक्षाद् भीमसेन:, ततश्च दिलीप:, दिलीपात् प्रतीप:)
देवापिर्बाल्य एवारण्यं विवेश।॥४॥
a a ama स्पृशति जीर्णं ae a
शान्तिञ्चाप्नोति येनाग्र्यां कर्मणा तेन शान्तनु:।।५॥

Paragara said— Pariksit, the son of Kuru,
had four sons, Janamejaya, Srutasena,

Ugrasena and Bhimsena.’ The son of Jahnu.

was Suratha; his son was Vidiratha; his son
was Sarvabhauma; his son was Jayasena, his
son was Aravin; his son was Ayutayus; his son
was Akrodhana; one of his sons was Devatithi
and another was called Riksa, his son was
Dilipa; his son was Pratipa, who had three
sons, Devapi, Santanu and Bahlika. The first
adopted in childhood a forest life and Santanu
became king. Of him this verse is spread
through the earth; "Santanu is his name,
because if he lays his hands upon an old man,
he restores him to youth and by him men
obtain tranquillity (Santi)."

तस्य शान्तनो TE द्वादशवर्षाणि Sat न ववर्ष॥ ६॥

ततश्च।शेषराष्टबिनाश्।पवेक्ष्यच्प्तो राजा ब्राह्मणानपृच्छत्,
भो:! कस्मादस्मिन् Us देवो न वर्षति, को ममापराध इति।
a तमूचु:-अग्रजस्य तेऽर्हेयमवतिस्त्वया भुज्यते, परिवेत्ता
त्वम्, इत्युक्त:। स पुनस्तानपृच्छत्, किं-मया विधेयमिति। ते

तमूचु:।
तानाह। ततस्ते ब्राह्मण: शान्तनुमूचु: आगच्छ भो राजन्!
अलमत्रातिनिर्बन्धेन, प्रशान्त एवसावनावृष्टिंदोष:
पतितोऽयनमादिकाल-महितवेदवचनदूषणोद्चारणात्। पतिते
राज्यमकरोत्। वेदबादबिरोघवचनोन्रारणदूषितॆ

ज्येष्ठेऽस्मिन् भ्रातरि देवापावखिलशस्यनिष्पत्तये ववर्ष

भगवान् TAT ९॥
In the kingdom over which Santanu ruled
there was no rain for twelve years.

Apprehensive that the country would become
a desert, the king assembled the Brahmanas
and asked them why no rain fell and what fault
he had committed. They told him that he was
as it were a younger brother married before an
elder, for he was in the enjoyment of the earth,
which was the right of his elder brother
Devapi. "What then am I to do?" said the Raja
: to which they replied, "Until the gods shall
be displeased with Devapi, by his declining
from the path of righteousness, the kingdom is
his and to him therefore you should resign it."
When the minister of the king Asmarsdrin,
heard this, he collected a number of ascetics
who taught doctrines opposed to those of the
Vedas and sent them into the forest; where
meeting with Devdpi, they perverted the
understanding of the simple-minded prince
and led him to adopt heretical notions. In the
meantime, Santanu being much distressed to
think that he had been guilty of the offence
intimated by the Brahmanas, sent them before
him into the woods and then proceeded thither
himself, to restore the kingdom to his elder
