BOOK V, CHAP. 13

447

inhabitants of Goloka, the heaven of cows:’ but this Govinda: अहंकिलेन्द्रो देवानां त्वं गवामिन्द्रतां गत:। गोविन्दं इति
is evidently unauthorized by the text, as celestial लोकास्त्वां स्तोष्यन्ति yfa madi All this is very different
cattle could not be grateful for preservation upon from the sober account of our text, and is
earth; and the notion of Goloka, a heaven of cows undoubtedly of comparatively recent origin.

and Krsna, is a modern piece of mysticism, drawn
from such sectarial works as the Brahma Vaivartta
Purana and Hari Vaméa. .

2. The purport of Indra's speech is to explain the
meaning of two of Krsna's names, Upendra and
Govinda. The commentators on the Amara Kosa
agree in explaining the first, the younger brother of
Indra, इन्द्रानुजत्वादुपन्द्र:। conformably to the synonym
that immediately follows in the text of Amara,
Indravaraja (इन्द्रावरज:); a name that occurs also in the
Mahabharata: Krsna, as the son of Devaki, who is
an incarnation of Aditi, being born of the latter
subsequently to Indra, Govinda is he who knows,
finds, or tends cattle; Gam vindati (at विन्दति), The
Pauranik etymology makes the latter the Indra (3%
quasi 3%) of cows; and in this capacity he may well
be considered as a minor or inferior Indra, such
being the proper sense of the term Upapurina ‘a
minor Purana,’ &c. The proper import of the word
Upendra has, however, been anxiously distorted by
the sectarian followers of Krsna. Thus the
commentator on our text asserts that Upa is here
synonymous with Upari (sat), and _ that
Upendratwa, “the station of Upendra,’ means 'rule
in the heaven of heavens, Goloka,' a new creation
of this sect, above Satya-loka, which, in the
uncorrupt Paurdnik system, is the highest of the
seven Lokas: see Bk. II. Ch. VII. So the Hari
Vaméa makes Indra say, ममोपरि यथेन्द्रस्त्वं स्थापितो गोभिरोश्वर:
srg इति कृष्ण tat गास्यन्ति दिवि देवता:। As you, Krsna, are
appointed, by the cows, Indra superior to me,
therefore the deities in heaven shall call you
Upendra.’ The Bhagavata does not introduce the
name though it no doubt alludes to it in making the
divine cow Surabhi, who is said to have come from
Goloka with India, address Krsna, and say, 7%
नस्त्वाभिपेक्ष्यामो ब्रह्मणा नोदितावयं। We, intructed by Brahma,
will crown you as our Indra’ Accordingly Krsna has
the water of the Ganges thrown over him by the
elephant of Indra, and India, the gods and sages
praise him, and salute him by the appellation of
Govinda. The Hari VamSa assigns thus to Indra
alone, who says, 'I am only the Indra of the gods;
you have attained the rank of Indra of the kine, and
they shall for ever celebrate you on earth as

kk
