220
approached him, and _— saluting him
revercntially (as if he was a_ stranger)

demanded why he was standing in such a
retired spot.
निदाघ उवाच

भो विप्र! जनसम्मर्दो महानेष जनेश्वरे।
प्रविविक्षौ पुरं रम्यं तेनात्र स्थीयते मया।। ५॥
Nidagha replied, ‘There is a great crowd of

people attending the entrance of the king into
the town, and I am staying here to avoid it.’.

ऋभुरुवाच

नराधिपोऽत्र कतम: कतमश्लेतरो जन:।
कथ्यतां मे fats! त्वमभिज्ञो मतो मम।।६॥

‘Tell me, excellent Brahmana,’ said Rbhu,
‘for I believe that you are wise, which is here
the king, and which is anyother man.’.

निदाघ उवाच

योऽयं गजेन्द्रमुन्मत्तमद्रिशृङ्गसमुच्छितम्।
अधिरूढो नरेन्द्रोऽयं परलोकस्तथेतर:।।७॥

‘The king,’ answered Nidagha, ‘is he who
is seated on the fierce and stately elephant,
vast as a mountain peak; the others are his
attendants.’

ऋभुरुवाच
एतौ fe गज-राजानौ Brag दर्शितौ मम।
भवता न faster पृथक्चिह्नोपलक्षणौ।। ८॥
तत् कथ्यतां महाभाग! विशेषो भवतानयो:।
ज्ञातुमिच्छाम्यहं AIST गज: को वा नगाधिप:।। ९॥

“You have shown me,’ observed Rbhu, ‘at
one moment the elephant and the king, without
noticing any peculiar characteristic by which
they may be distinguished. Tell me, venerable
sir, is there any difference between them? for I
am desirous to Know which is here the
clephant, which is the king.’

निदाघ sara
गजो योऽयमधो Taq! उपर्य्यस्यैष भूपति:।
वाह्य-वाहकसम्बन्धं को न जानाति वै fast १०॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

‘The elephant,’ answered Nidagha, ‘is
underneath; the king is above him. Who is not
aware, Brahmana, of the relation betwecn that
which bears and that which is borne?’

ऋभुरुवाच
जानाम्यहं यथा ब्रह्मंस्तथा मामवबोधय।
अध:शब्दनिगद्यं fe किञ्चोर्द्धमभिधीयते।। ११॥

To this Rbhu rejoined, ‘Still explain to me,
according to what I know of it, this matter:
what is it that is meant by the word
underneath, and what is it that is termed
above?’ As soon as he had uttered this,

ब्राह्मण उवाच

इत्युक्त: सहसारुह्य निदाघ: we तं ऋभुम्।
श्रूयतां कथयाम्येष यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि।। १२॥
उपर्य्यहं यथा राजा त्वमध: कुञ्जरो यथा।
अवबोधाय ते wer! दृष्टान्तो दर्शितो मया।। १३॥

Brahmana said— Nidagha jumped upon
Rbhu, and said, ‘Here is my answer to the
question you have asked: I am above, like the
Raja; you are underneath, like the elephant.
This example, Brahmana, is intended for your
information.’

ऋभुरुवाच
त्वं राजेव द्विजश्रेष्ठ! स्थितोऽहं wae यदि।
तदेतत् त्वं समाचक्ष्व कतमस्त्वमहं तथा।। १४॥
‘Very well,’ said Rbhu, ‘you, it seems, are
as it were the Raja, and I am like the elephant;

but come now do you tell me which of us two
is you; which is I.’

ब्राह्मण उवाच

इत्युक्त: सत्वरं तस्य प्रगृह्य चरणावुभौ।

निदाघ: wre भगवानाचार्य्यस्त्वमृभुर्धुवम्।। १५॥
नान्यस्याद्वैतसंस्कारसंस्कृतं मानसं तथा।
यथाचार्य्यस्य तेन त्वां मन्ये प्राप्तमहं गुरुम्।। १६॥
तवोपदेशदानाय पूर्व्वशुश्रूषणादृत:।
गुरुस्तेऽहमृभुर्नाम्ना निदाघ! समुपागत:॥ १७॥
तदेतदुपदिष्टं ते सङ्खेषेण महामते।
परमार्थसारभूतं यदद्वैतमशेषत:॥ १८॥
