BOOK IV, 19

377

12. See Bk. II. Ch. IIL. n. 3, 46, 49, 50 and 73.
of Suhma it may be remarked, that it is specified in
the Siddhanta Kaumudi as an example of P4nini's
rule; Wat नगरान्ते। 7.3.24; by which Nagara
compounded with names of countries in the east
becomes Niagara, as Sauhmandgara (aterarr:),
‘produced, in a city of Suhma'. The descendants of
Anu, according to the Mahabharata were all
Mlecchas. The last named work, as well as the
Vayu and Matsya Puranas, have an absurd story of
the circumstances of the birth of Dirghatamas, who
was the son of Ujasi or Utathya, the elder brother of
Brhaspati by Mamata and of his begetting Anga
and the rest. They agree in assigning descendants of
all four castes to them; the Vayu stating that Bali
had पुत्रान् चातुर्व्वर्ण्यकरान्। and the Matsya ascribing it to
a boon given by Brahma to Bali : चतुरो नियतान् वर्णान्
त्वं स्थापयेति। ‘Do you establish the four perpetual
castes.' Of these, the Brahmanas are known as
Baleyas : बालेषा: ब्राह्मणाश्चवै। The Matsya calls Bali,
the son of Virocana and आयुकल्पप्रमाणिक:। ‘existing
for a whole Kalpa;' identifying him therefore, only
in a different period and form, with the Bali of the
Vamana Avatara.

13. Andpina : Vayu. Khandpina ; Bhagavata,
Adhivahana : Agni. Dadhivahana : Matsya.

14. This prince is said in the Vayu to have drunk
the Soma juice along with Indra ; येन विष्णुपदे गिरौ सोम:
शक्रेणसह वै पीतो महात्मना।

15. The Matsya and Agni insert a Satyaratha.

16. This is noticed in the Ramayana, in the story
of the hermit Rsyasmga, to whom Santa was given
in marriage. Her adoptive father is called in the
Ramayana, as he is in the Agni and Matsya,
Lomap4da : the meaning is the same, ‘hairy foot.'
Ramayana, IX. X. See also Prelude to the Uttara
Rama Caritra, Hindu Theatre, I, 289.

17. The Bhagavata differs here from all the other
authorities in omitting Campa, the founder of
Campapuri, a city of which traces stil] remain in the
vicinity of Bhagalpur, having inserted him
previously amongst the descendants of Iksvaku (see
Bk. IV. Ch. III. n. 12). Campa is every where
recognised as the capital of Anga and the
translators of the Ramayana were very wide off the
truth, when they conjectured that it might be Angva
or Ava.

18. Vrhaddarbha : Brahma. The Bhagavata omits
the two successors of Campa and makes

Vrhadratha, Vrhatkarman and Vrhadbhanu, sons of
Prthulaksa.

19. The Vayu, Matsya and Hari Varhsa make
Vijaya the brother of Jayadratha. The Bhagavata
agrees with our text. The mother of Vijaya from her
origin was of the Sita caste, the genealogist and
charioteer, Manu, X. 47, Her son was of the same
caste, children taking the caste of the mother ;
consequently the descendants of Vijaya, kings of
Anga, were Siitas; and this explains the
contemptuous application of the term Sita to
Karna, the half brother of the Pandus; for he, as
will presently be mentioned, was adopted into the
Anga family and succeeded to the crown.

20. Some variety prevails in the series of princes
here, but this arises from not distinguishing the
collateral lines, the descendants of Jayadratha from
those of Vijaya. The Vayu and Matsya give the
latter as in our text, but they agree also with the
Agni and Brahma in the successors of Jayadratha,
as Drdharatha or Vrhadratha and Janamejaya or
Visvajit.

21. Strasena : Vayu. Vikarna : Brahma.

eK
