BOOK VI, CHAP. 1

531

Women will bear children at the age of
five, six, or seven years; and men beget them
when they are eight, nine, or ten. A man will
be grey when he is twelve; and no one will
exceed twenty years of life.'’* Men will possess
little sense, vigour, or virtue, and will
therefore perish in a very brief period. In
proportion as heresy extends, so, Maitreya,
shall the progress of the Kali age be estimated
by the wise.

यदा यदा Bat हानिर्वेदमार्गानुसारिणाम्।
प्रारम्भाश्चावसीदन्ति यदा धर्म्मभृतां नृणाम्।
तदानुमेयं प्राधान्यं कलेर्मैत्रेय पण्डितै:।। ४५॥
यदा यदा न यज्ञानामीश्वर: पुरुषोत्तम:।
इज्यते पुरुषैर्यज्ञैस्तदा ज्ञेयं कलेर्बलम्।।४६॥
न प्रीतिर्वेदवादेषु पाषण्डेषु wer रति:।
कलेर्व्रद्धिस्तदा प्राज्ञैरनुमेया विचक्षणै:।। ४७॥

In proportion as the number of the pious,
who adhere to the lessons of the Vedas,
diminishes—as the eff6rts of individuals who
cultivate virtue relax— as the first of males
becomes no longer the object of sacrifices— as
respect for the teachers of the Vedas declines—
and as regard is acknowledged for the dis-
eminators of heresy— so may wise men note
the augmented influence of the Kali age.”

कलौ जगत्पतिं विष्णुं सर्वस्रष्टारमीश्वरम्।
नार्च्चयिष्यन्ति Axa पाषण्डोपहता नरा:।।४८॥
इत्येवं विप्र वक्ष्यन्ति पाषण्डोपहता नरा:।।४९॥
स्वल्पाम्बुवृष्टि: Wet: wet स्वल्पफलं तथा |
wet तथाल्पसारञ्च far प्राप्ते कलौ युगे।। ५०॥
शाणीप्रायाणि वस्त्राणि शमीप्राया महीरुहा:।
शूद्रप्रायास्तथा ant भविष्यन्ति कलौ युगे।। ५१॥
अणुप्रायाणि धान्यानि अजाप्रायं तथा पय:।
भविष्यति कलौ प्राप्ते उषीरञ्चानुलेपनम्॥ ७ २॥

In the Kali age, Maitreya, men, corrupted
by unbelievers, will refrain from adoring Vis
nu, the lord of sacrifice, the creator and lord of
all; and will say, “Of what authority are the

Vedas? what are gods or Brahmans? what
need is there of purification with water?” Then
will the clouds yield scanty rain: then will the
corn be light in ear, and the grain will be poor,
and of little sap: garments will be mostly made
of the fibres, of the San: the principal of trees
will be the Sami'’: the prevailing caste will be
the Sidra: millet will be the more common
grain: the milk in use will be chiefly that of
goats: unguents will be made of Usira grass.

श्वभू-श्वशूरभूयिष्ठा Pas Tut कलौ।

श्यालाद्या हारिभार्यांश्च सुहृदो मुनिसत्तम॥ & 3

कस्य माता पिता कस्य यदा BATT: पुमान्।

इति चोदाहरिष्यन्ति श्वशुरानुगता नरा:।। ५ ४॥

नरा: पापान्यनुदिनं करिष्यन्त्यल्पमेधस: ।। ५५॥

नि:सत्त्वानामशौचानां नि:श्रीकाणां तथा नॄणाम्।

यद्ययद्दु:खाय यत् सर्वं कलि काले भविघ्यति।। ५७॥

The mother and father-in-law will be
venerated in place of parents; and a man’s
friends will be his brother-in-law, or one who
has a wanton wife. Men will say, “Who has a
father? who has a mother? each one is born
according to his deeds:” and therefore they
will look upon a wife’s or husband’s parents
as their own. Endowed with little sense, men,
subject to all the infirmities of mind, speech,
and body, will daily commit sins; and
everything that is calculated to afflict beings,
vicious, impure, and wretched, will be
generated in the Kali age.

नि:स्वाध्यायवषट्कारे स्वधास्वाहाविवर्जिते।
तथा प्रविरलो far क्वचिल्लोको निवत्स्यति।। ५७॥

तत्राल्पेनैव यत्नेन पुण्यस्कन्धमनुत्तमम्।
करोति यं कृतयुगे क्रियते तपसा हि aye
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे षष्ठांशे प्रथम: अध्याय:॥

Then shall some places follow a separate
duty,’ devoid of holy study, oblations of fire,
and invocations of the gods."’ Then, in the Kali
age, shall a man acquire by a trifling exertion
as much eminence in virtue as is the result of
arduous penance in the Krta age, of purity."
