BOOK I, CHAP. 15

105

12, This is the usual list of Dharma's wives. The
Bhagavata substitutes Kakud for Arundhati. The
Padma Purana, Matsya Purana, and Hari Vaima
contain two different account of Daksa's
descendants: the first agrees with our text: the
second, which is supposed to occur in the Padma
Kalpa, is somewhat varied, particularly as to the
wives of Dharma, who are said to be five. The
nomenclature varies, or

Padma Purana Hari Vathsa. = Matsya.
Laksmi Laksmi Laksmi
Sarasvati Kirtti Sarasvati
Ganga Sadhya Sadhya
Visvesa Viswa Visvesa
Savitri Marutwati Urjjaswati.

There is evident inaccuracy in all the copies, and
the names may in some instances be erroneous.
From the succeeding enumeration of their
descendants, it appears that Kama was the son of
Laksami; the Sadhyas, of Sadhya; the Visvadevas.
of Visva; the Maruts. of Marutvati; and the Vasus
of Devi, who may be either the Sarasvati or Savitri
of the previous enumeration.

13. The Visvadevas are a class of gods to whom
sacrifices should be offered daily. Manu, UY. 121.
They are named in some of the Puranas, as the
Vayu and Matsya : the former specifying ten; the
latter, twelve.

14. The Sadhyas. according to the Vayu, are the
personified rites and prayers of the Vedas, born of
the metres, and partakers of the sacrifices: साध्या नाम
महाभागा छन्दजा यज्ञभागिन:। Ted मन्त्रशरीरा:। The same
work names twelve, which are all names of
sacrifice and formulae. as Darsa, Paurnamasa,
Brhadagva, Rathantara, etc. The Matsya Purana,
Padma Purana, and Hari V. have a different set of
seventeen appellations, apparently of arbitrary
selection, as Bhava, Prabhava, Isa, Aruni, etc.

15, Or, accorbing to the Padma Purana, because
they are always present in light, or luminous
irradiation : ज्योतिषायां तु ये दॆवा व्यापका सर्व्वतो दिशं। वसवस्ते
समान्याता:॥

16. The Vayu supplies their names Ksamavartta
(patient) and Manasvia (wise).

17. The passage is, ध्नस् TART रुद्रश्च
बुद्धिमान्। त्वष्टुश्चाप्यात्मज: पुत्रो विश्वरूपो महायशा:॥ Whose
sons they are does not appear : the object being,
according to the comment, to specify only the
‘eleven divisions or modifications of the youngest

Rudra. Twashta ; त्वष्टुरनुजस्य रुद्रस्यैकादशधा विभागं। We
have, however, an unusual variety of reading here
in two copies of the comment : "The eleven Rudras,
in whom the family of Tvashtri (a synonym, in may
be observed, sometimes of Viswakarm4) is
included, were born. The enumeration of the Rudra
ends with Aparajita, of whom Tryambaka is the
epithet F

j इति त्र्यम्बकविशेषणं। Accordingly
the three last names in all the other copies of the
text are omitted in these two; their placcs being
supplied by the three first, two of whom are always
named in the lists of the Rudras. According to the
Vayu and Brahma Purana the Rudras are the
children of Kasyapa by Surabhi : the Bhagavata
makes them the progeny of Bhita and Sartipa :the
Matsya. Padma. and Hari V., in the second series,
the offspring of Surabhi by Brahma. The names in
three of the Pauranic -authorities run thus ;

Vayu Matsya Bhagavata.
Ajaikapad Ajaikapad Ajaikapad
Ahirvrudhn Ahirvradhni  Ahirvradhna
Hara Hara Ugra
Nirrita Nirritti Bhima

Ivara Pingala Vama
Bhuvana Dahana Mahan
Angaraka Aparajita Bahuriipa
Arddhaketu Mrgavyadha Vrsakapi
Mrtyu Senani Aja

Sarpa Sajja Bhava
Kapaili Kapali Raivata.

The Brahma or Hari V., the Padma. the Linga.
etc. have other varieties; and the Lexicons have a
different reading from all. as in that of Jatadhara
they are Ajaikapad. Ahivradhna. Virtipaksu.
Suregvara. Jayanta. Bahurfipaka. Tryambaka,
Aparajita, Vaivaswata, Savitra, and Hara. The
variety seems to proceed from the writers applying
to the Rudras, as they may legitimately do. different
appellations of the common prototype, or
synonyms of Rudra or Siva, selected at will from
his thousand and eight names, according to the
Linga Purana ॥

18. The posterity of Daksa's daughters by
Dharma are clearly allegorical personifications
chiefly of two classes, one consisting of
astronomical phenomena, and the other of portions
or subjects of the ritual of the Vedas.
