4

THE VISNU-PURANAM

the first is the most usual etymon, 2. Vigvabhavana,
the creator of the universe, or the cause of the
existence of all things. 3. Hrshikega, lord of the
senses. 4. Mahapurusa, great or supreme spirit;
purusa meaning that which abides or is quiescent in
body (puri sete). 5. Purvaja, produced or appearing
before creation; the Orphic ‘tp@toy ovos'. In the
fifth book, c. 18, Visnu is described by five
appellations, which are considered analogous to
these; or, I, Bhitdétma, one with created things, or
Pundarikaéksa; 2. Pradhaéndtma4, one with crude
nature, or Visvabhavana : 3. Indriyatma, one with
the senses, or Hrshikesa : 4. Paramatma, supreme
spirit, or Mahapurusa : and Atma, soul; living soul,
animating nature and existing before it, or Pirvaja.

3. Brahma, in the neuter form, is abstract
supreme spirit: and ISvara is the Deity in his active
nature, he who is able to do or leave undone, or to
do any thing in any other manner than that in which
it is done: कर्तुमकर्तुमन्यथा कर्तुं समर्थ:।

4. Pumdn which is the same with Purusa,
incorporated spirit. By this and the two preceding
terms also the commentator understands the text to
signify that Visnu is any form of spiritual being that
is acknowledged by different philosophical
systems, or that he is the Brahma of the Vedanta,
the Igvara of the Patafijala, and the Purusa of the
Samkhya school.

5. The three qualities, to which we shall have
further occasion to advert, are Satya (ae),
goodness or purity, knowledge, quiescence; Rajas,
foulness, passion, activity; and Tamas, darkness,
ignorance, inertia.

6. Pradhanabuddhydadisth. This predicate of the
Deity distinguishes most of the Puranas from
several of the philosophical systems, which
maintain, as did the earliest Grecian systems of
cosmogony, the eternal and independent existence
of the first principle of things, as nature, matter, or
chaos. Accordingly, the commentator notices the
objection. Pradhana being without beginning, it is
said how can Visnu be its parent? To which he
replies, that this is not so, for in a period of worldly
destruction (Pralaya), when the Creator desists
from creating, nothing is generated by virtue of any
other energy or parent. Or, if this be not
satisfactory, then the text may be understood to
imply that intellect (Buddhi) etc, are formed

through the materiality of crude nature, or
Pradhana.

7. Visnu is commonly derived in the Puranas
from the root Vis, to enter, entering into, or
pervading the universe, agreeably to the text of the
Vedas, तत्सृष्टा | "Having created that
(world), he then afterwards enters into it; being, as
our comment observes, undistinguished by place,
time, or property; व्यवच्छेदाभावात्।
According to the Matsya Purana the name alludes
to his entering into the mundane egg: according to
the Padma Purana, to his entering into or com-
bining with Prakrti, as Purusa or spirit: स Ca Wary
विष्णु प्रकृत्यामाविवेश Fi In the Moksa Dharma of the
Mahabharata, s. 165, the word is derived from the
root vi. signifying motion, pervasion, production,
radiance; or, irregularly, from krama, to go with the
particle vi, implying, variously, prefixed.

8. Brahma and the rest is said to apply to the
series of teachers through whom this Purana was
transmitted from its first reputed author Brahma, to
its actual narrator, the sage Pardgara. See also b, VI.
c. 8,

9, The Guru, or spiritual preceptor, is said to be
Kapila or Sarasvata: the latter is included in the
series of teachers of the Purana, Parégara must be
considered also as a disciple of Kapila, as a teacher
of the Samkhya philosophy.

10. Maitreya is the disciple of Parasara, who
relates the Visnu Purana to him; he is also one of
the chief interlocutors in the Bhagavata, and is
introduced in the Mahabharata (Vana Parva, s. 10.)
as a great Rsi, or sage, who denounces
Duryodhana's death. In the Bhagavata be is also
termed Kausharavi, or the son of Kusharava.

11. One copy reads Yuga dharma, the duties
peculiar to the four 14 ages, or their characteristic
properties, instead of Yuganta.

12. Sacrifice of Parasara. The story of Pardsara's
birth is narrated in detail in the Mahabharata (Adi
Parva, s. 176). King Kalmasapada meeting with
Sakti, the son of Vasistha, in a narrow path in a
thicket, desired him to stand out of his way. The
sage refused : on which the Raja beat him with his
whip, and Sakti cursed him to become a Raksasa, a
man-devouring spirit The Raja in _ this
transformation killed and ate its author, or Sakti,
together with all the other sons of Vasistha, Sakti
