432

THE VISNU-PURANAM

sobs, upon Kegava. ‘‘Let us all,’ said they,
“plunge with Yasod4 into the fearful pool of
the serpent-king. We cannot return to Vraja;
for what is day, without the sun? What nigot,
without the moon? What is a herd of heifers,
without its lord? What is Vraja, without Krs
na? Deprived of him, we will go no more to
Gokula. The forest will lose its delights; it will
be like a lake without water. When this dark
lotus leaf complexioned Hari is not present,
there is no joy in the maternal dwelling. How
strange is this ! And as for you, you cowherds,
how, poor beings, will you live amidst the
pastures, when you no longer behold the
brilliant lotus eyes of Hari? Our hearts have
been wield away by the music of his voice.
We will not go without Pundarikaksa to the
folds of Nanda. Even now, though held in the
coils of the serpent-king, see, friends, how his
face brightens with smiles as we gaze upon
him.”
पराशर उवाच

इति गोपीवच: grat रौहिणेयो महाबल:।

गोपांश्च त्रासविधुरान् विलोक्य स्तिमितेक्षण:॥ ३३॥

OHA यशोदाञ्च कृष्णमाहात्मसंज्ञया।। ३४॥

किमिदं देवदेवेश! भावोऽयं मानुषस्त्वया।

व्यज्यतेऽत्यन्तमात्मानं किमनन्तं न वेत्सि यत्।। ३५॥

त्वमस्य जगतो नाभिरराणामिव संश्रय:।

कर्त्तपहरत्ता पाता च त्रैलोक्यं त्वं त्रयीमय:।। ३६॥

चिन्त्यसे त्वमचिन्त्यात्मन्! समस्तैश्चैव योगिभि:। ३७॥

जगत्यर्थं जगन्नाथ! भारावतरणेच्छया।

अवतीर्णेऽत्र ely तवांशश्चाहमग्रज:॥। ३८॥

मनुष्यलीलां भगवान्! भजता भवता सुरा:।

विडम्बयन्तस्त्वल्लीलां सर्व Wa समासते।। ३९॥

अवतार्य्य भवान् पूर्व्व गोकुलेऽत्र सुराङ्गना:।

क्रीडार्थमात्मन: पश्चादवतीर्णेऽसि शाश्वत:॥४०॥

अत्रावतीर्ण ये कृष्ण! गोपा wa fe बान्धवा:।

गोप्यश्च सीदत: कस्मात् त्वं बन्धून् समुपेक्षसे।। ४१॥

दर्शितो मानुषो भावो दर्शितं बालचापलम्।

तदयं दम्यतां कृष्ण! दुरात्मा दशनायुध:॥४२॥

When the mighty son of Rohini, Balarama
heard these exclamations of the Gopis and
with disdainful glance beheld the cowherds
overcome with terror, Nanda gazing fixedly
upon the countenance of his son and Yasoda
unconscious, he spoke to Krsna in his own
character: ‘‘What is this, O god of gods ! the
quality of mortal is sufficiently assumed; do
you not know yourself eternal? You are the
centre of creation, as the nave is of the spokes
of a wheel. A portion of you have I also been
born, as your senior. The gods, to partake of
your pastimes as man, have all descended
under a like disguise; and the goddesses have
come down to Gokula to join in your spores.
You, eternal, have last of all appeared below.
Wherefore, Krsna, do you disregard these
divinities, who, as cowherds, are your friends
and kin? These sorrowing females, who also
are your relations? You have put on the
character of man; you have exhibited the tricks
of childhood: now let this fierce snake, though
armed with venomed tangs, be subdued, (by
your celestial vigour).”

WHR उवाच
इति संस्मारित: कृष्ण: स्मितभिन्नोष्ठसंपुट:।
आस्फोटय मोचयामास स्वदेहं भोगबन्धनात्।।४३॥
आनम्य चापि हस्ताभ्यामुभाभ्यां मध्यमं फणम्।
आरुह्याभुग्नशिरस: प्रननत्तेरुविक्रम:॥ ४४॥
व्रणा: फणेऽभवंस्तस्य कृष्णस्याङ्घिनिकुट्टनै:।
यत्रोन्नतिञ्च कुरुते ननामास्य तत: शिर:॥४५॥
Tesi भ्रान्त्या नाग: कृष्णस्य रेचकै:।
दण्डपातनिपातेन ववाम VAT बहु॥४६॥
तन्निर्भिन्नशिरोग्रीवमास्येभ्य: स्रुतशोणितम्।
विलोक्य शरणं जग्मुस्तत्पत्न्यो मधुसूदनम्।४७॥

Thus reminded of his real character by
Rama, Krsna smiled gently and speedily
extricated himself froin the coils of the snakes.
Laying hold of the middle hood of their chief
