BOOK II, CHAP. 8

187

he illuminates two of the cities and three
intermediate points (in either case one
hemisphere). From the period of his rise the
sun moves with increasing rays until noon,
when he proceeds towards his setting with rays
diminishing (that is, his heat increases or
diminishes in proportion as he advances to, or
recedes from, the meridian of any place). The
east and west quarters are so called from the
sun’s rising and setting there.’ As far as the
sun shines in front, so far ne shines behind and
On either hand, illuminating all places except
the summit of Meru, the mountain of the
immortals; for when his rays reach the court of
Brahma, which is there situated, they are
repelled and driven back by the overpowering
radiance which there prevails: consequently
there is always the alternation of day and
night, according as the divisions of the
continent lie in the northern (or southern)
quarter, or inasmuch as they are situated north
(or south) of Meru.®

प्रभा विवस्वतो रात्रावस्तं गच्छति भास्करे।

विशत्यग्निमतो Tat वह्निर्दूरात् प्रकाशते।। २१॥

वह्निपादस्तथा भान्तं दिनेष्वाविशति द्विज!

अतीव वह्निसंयोगादत: सूर्य: प्रकाशते।। २२॥

तेजसी भास्कराग्नेये प्रकाशोष्णस्वरूपिणी।

परस्परानुप्रवेशादाप्यायेते दिवानिशम्॥ २३॥

दक्षिणोत्तरभूम्यरद्धे समुत्तिष्ठति भास्करे।

अहोरात्रं विशत्यम्भस्तम: प्राकाश्यशीलवत्।। २४॥

आताम्रा हि भवन्त्यापो दिवा नक्तप्रवेशनात्।

दिनं विशति चैवाम्भो भास्करेऽस्तमुपेयुषि।

तस्माच्छुक्लीभवन्त्यापो नक्तमम्भ:प्रवेशनात्॥ २५॥

The radiance of the solar orb, when the sun
has set, is accumulated in fire, and hence fire
is visible at a greater distance by night than by
day: during the latter a fourth of the rays of
fire blend with those of the sun, and from their
union the sun shines with greater intensity by
day. Elemental light, and heat derived from
the sun or from fire, blending with each other,
mutually prevail in various proportions, both
by day and night. When the sun is present

either in the southern or the northern
hemisphere, day or night retires into the
waters, according as they are invaded by
darkness or light: it is from this cause that the
waters look dark by day, because night is
within them, and they look white by night,
because at the setting of the sun the light of
day takes refuge in their bosom.”

एवं पुष्करमध्ये तु यदा याति दिवाकर:।

त्रिंशद्धागन्तु मेदिन्यास्तदा मौहूर्तिकी गति:।। २६॥

कुलालचक्रपर्यन्तो भ्रमन्नेष दिवाकर:।

करोत्यहस्तथा रात्रिं विमुञ्चेन्मेदिनीं fis २७॥

अयनस्योत्तरस्यादौ मकरं याति भास्कर:।

तत: कुम्भञ्च मीनञ्च राशे राश्यन्तरं द्विज।। २८॥

प्रयाति सविता कुर्वन्नहोरात्रं तत: समम्।

ततो रात्रि: क्षयं याति वर्द्धतेऽनुदिनं दिनम्।। २९॥

ततश्च मिथुनस्यान्त्ये पराकाष्ठामुपागत:।

राशं कर्कटकं WT कुरुते दक्षिणायनम्। ३ ०॥

When the sun has travelled in the centre of
Puskara a thirtieth part of the circumference of
the globe, his course is equal in time to one
Muhartta;’° and whirling round like the
circumference of the wheel of a potter, he
distributes day and night upon the earth. In the
commencement of his northern course, the sun
passes to Capricornus, thence to Aquarius,
thence to Pisces, going successively from one
sign of the Zodiac to another. After he has
passed through these, the sun attains his
equinoctial movement (the vernal equinox),
when he makes the day and night of equal
duration. Thenceforward the length of the
night decreases, and the day becomes longer,
until the sun reaches the end of Gemini, when
he pursues a different direction, and entering
Cancer, beings his declension to the south.

कुलालचक्रपर्यन्तो यथा शीघ्रं प्रवर्त्तते।

दक्षिणे प्रक्रमे सूर्यस्तथा शीघ्रं wert ३ १॥
अतिवेगितया कालं वायुवेगबलाच्चलन्।
तस्मात्प्रकृष्टां भूमिन्तु कालेनाल्पेन गच्छति।॥। ३ २॥
