544

mother’s food; incapable of extending or
contracting its limbs; reposing amidst the
slime of ordure and urine; every way
incommoded; unable to breathe; endowed with
consciousness, and calling to memory many
hundred previous births. Thus exists the
embryo in profound affliction, bound to the
world by its former works.

जायमान: WMP AYR aCTTT: |
प्राजापत्येन वातेन USAT era १४॥
क्लेशैर्निष्क्रान्तिमापोति जठरान्मातुरातुर:।। १५॥
Tatar महतीं संस्पृष्टो बाह्यवायुना।
विज्ञानभ्रंशमाप्नोति जातश्च मुनिसत्तम ।। १६॥
कङ्कटैरिव तुन्नाङ्ग क्रकचैरिव दारित:।
पूतिव्रणान्निपतितो धरण्यां कृमिको यथा ॥ १७॥
कण्डूयने चाप्यशक्त: Uae: |
स्तन्यपानादिकाहारमवाप्नोति परेच्छया॥ १८॥

When the child is about to be born, its face
is besmeared by excrement, urine, blood,
mucus, and semen; its attachment to the uterus
is ruptured by the Prajapati wind; it is turned
head downwards, and violently expelled from
the womb by the powerful and painful winds
of parturition; and the infant losing for a time
all sensation, when brought in contact with the
external air, is immediately dcprived of its
intellectual knowledge. Thus born, the child is
tortured in every limb, as if pierced with
thorns, or cut to pieces with a saw, and falls
from its fetid lodgment, as from a sore, like a
crawling thing upon the earth. Unable to feel
itself, unable to turn itself, it is dependent
upon the will of others for being bathed and
nourished.

अशुचि: wert ga: कीटदंशादिभिस्तथा।
भक्ष्यमाणोऽपि नैवैषां समर्थो विनिवारणे।। १९॥
जन्मदु:खान्यनेकानि जन्मनोऽनन्तराणि वै।
बालभावे यदाप्नोति आधिभौतादिकानि च।। २०॥

Laid upon a dirty bed, it is bitten by insects
and mosquitoes, and has not power to drive

THE VISNU-PURANAM

them away. Many are the pangs attending
birth, and many are those which succeed to
birth; and many are the sufferings which are
inflicted by elemental and superhuman agency
in the state of childhood.

अज्ञानतमसाच्छन्नो मूढान्त:करणो नर:।

न जानाति ae: कोऽहं क्वाहं गन्ता किमात्मक:॥ 2 १॥

at बन्धेन बद्धोऽहं कारणं किमकारणम्।

fa कार्य्य किमकार्य्य वा किं वाच्यं किन्न वोच्यते॥। २२

कोऽधर्म्म: aay वै ad: कस्मिन् ad वा कथम्।

fa कर्त्तव्यकर्त्तव्यं किं वा किं गुणदोषवत्।। २३॥

Enveloped by the gloom of ignorance, and
internally bewildered, man knows not whence
he is, who he is, whither he goes, nor what is
his nature; by what bonds he is bound; what is
cause, and what is not cause ; what is to be
done and what is to be left undone; what is to
be said, and what is to be kept silent; what is
righteousness, what is iniquity; in what it
consists, or how; what is right, what is wrong,
what is virtue, what is vice.

एवं wgEniewaTd महत्।

अवाप्यते नरैर्दु:खं शिश्नोदरपरायणै:।। २४॥
अज्ञानं तामसो भाव: कार्यारम्भा: प्रवृत्तय:।
अज्ञानिनां vad कर्म्मलोपास्ततो fast २५॥
नरकं कर्मणां लोपात् फलमाहुर्महर्षय:।
तस्मादज्ञानिनां दु:खमिह चामुत्र चोत्तमम्॥ २६॥

Thus man, like a brute beast, addicted only
to animal gratifications, suffers the pain that
ignorance occasions. Ignorance, darkness,
inactivity, influence those devoid of
knowledge, so that pious works are neglected;
but hell is the consequence of neglect of
religious acts, according to the great sages,
and the ignorant therefore suffcr affliction
both in this world and in the next.

जराजर्ज्जरदेहश्च शिथिलावयव: क्रमात्।
विगलच्छीर्णदशनो बली स्नायुशिराव्रृत:। २७॥
दुरप्रनष्टनयनो व्योमान्तर्मततारक:।
नासाविवरनिर्यात-लोपपुञ्चजश्चलद्वपु:।। २८॥
