BOOK I, CHAP. 10

67

Kratu, Sannati, brought forth the sixty
thousand Balakhilyas, pigmy sages, no bigger
than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious,

resplendent as the rays of the sun Vasistha
had seven sons by his wife Urjja, Rajas, Gatra,
Urdhvabahu. Savana, Anagha, Sutapas, and

Sukra. the seven pure sages The Agni named
Abhimani. who is the eldest born of Brahma,
had, by Svaha, three sons or surpassing
brilliancy, Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suci, who
drinks up water: they had forty-five sons, who,
with the original son of Brahma and his three
descendants, constitute the forty-nine fires’.

पितरो ब्रह्मणा YET व्याख्याता B मया Tah Yon
अग्निष्वाता बहिर्घदोऽनग्नय: साग्नयश्च ये।
तेभ्य: स्वधा सुते जज्ञे मेनां वैधारिणीं sam १८॥
ते उभे ब्रह्मवादिन्यौ योगिन्यौ चाप्युभे द्विज।
उत्तमज्ञानसम्पन्ने सर्वै: समुदितैर्गुणे:।। १९॥
इत्येषा दक्षकन्यानां कथितापत्यसन्तति:।
श्रद्धावान् संस्मरन्नेतामनपत्यो न जायते।। २०)॥
इति विष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे दशमोऽध्याय:।

The progenitors (Pitrs), who as I have
mentioned, were created by Brahma, were the
Agnisvattas and Barhisads; the former being
devoid of, and the latter possessed of, fires’.
By them. Svadhé had two daughters, Mena
and Dharani, who were both acquainted with
theological truth, and both addicted to
religious meditation; both accomplished in
perfect wisdom, and adorned with all
estimable qualities". Thus has been oxPipined
the progeny of the daughters of Daksa.
who with faith recapitulates the account, ra
never want offspring.

eK

NOTES

1. The commentator interprets the text ततो वेदशिरा
Wa to refer to Prana: प्राणस्य वेदशिरा जज्ञे। ‘Vedasiras
was born the son of Prana.’ So the Bhagavata has
मार्कण्डेस्य प्राणाद्वेदशिरा मुनि:। The Linga, the Vayu. and
Markandeya. however, confirm our reading of the
text. making Vedasiras the son of Markandeya.
Prana, or, as read in the two former, Pandu. was
married to Pundarika, and had by her Dyutimat,

whose sons were Srijavana and Asruta or
Asrutavrana. Mrkanda (also read Mrkandu) married
Maoaswini, and had Markaandeya. whose son, by
Murddhanyd, was Vedasiras : he married Pivari,
and had many children, who constituted the family,
or Brahmanical tribe, of Bhargavas, sons of Bhrgu,
The most celebrated of these was USanas, the
preceptor of the Daityas. who, according to the
Bhagavata, was the son of Vedasiras; but the Vayu
makes him the son of Bhrgu by Paulomi, and born
at a different period.

2. Alluding especially to KaSyapa, the son of
Marichi. of whose posterity a full detail is
subsequently given. The Bhagavata adds a
daughter, Devakulya : and the Vayu and Linga,
four daughters, Tusti, Pusti, Twisa, and Apaciti The
latter inserts the grandsons of Paurnamdsa. Virajas,
married to Gauri, has Sudhaman, a Lokapala, or
tular of the east quarter; and Parvasa (quasi
Sarvaga) has, by Parvasi. Yajfiavama and Kasyata,
who were both founders of Gotras, or families. The
names of all these occur in different forms in
different MSS.

3. The Bhagavata adds, that in the Swdrocisa
Manvantara the sages Uttathya and Vrhaspati were
also sons of Angiras,; and the Vayu, etc, specify
Agni and Kirttimat as the sons of the patriarch in
the first Manvantara. Agni, married to Sadwati, has
Parjanya, married to Marichi; and their son is
Hirauyaroman, a Lokapala. Kirttimat has, by
Dhenuka, two sons, Carisnu and Dhrtimat.

4. The Bhagavata gives an account of Attri'a
penance, by which the three gods. Brahma, Visnu,
and Siva, were propitiated, and became, in portions
of themselves, severally his sons, Soma, Datta. and
Durvasas. The Vayu has a totally different series, or
five sons. Satyanetra. Havya, Apomurtti, Sani, and
Soma; and one daughter, Sruti, who became the
wife of Kardama.

5. The text would seem to imply that he was
called Agastya in a former Manvantara, but the
commentator explains it as above. The Bhagavata
calls the wife of Pulastya. Havirbhi, whose sons
were the Muni Agastya, called in a former birth
Dahragni or Jatharagni. and Viaravas. The latter
bad by Mavila, the deity of wealth, Kuvera; and by
Kesini, the Raksusas Ravana, Kumbhakarna. and
Vibhisana. The Vayu specifies three sons of
Pulastya, Dattoli, Vedabahu, and Vinita; and one
daughter, Sadwati, married (see note 3) to Agni.
