BOOK I, CHAP. 22

135

manifestation does Jandrddana operate in
creation, preservation, and destruction. In one
pottion, as Brahma, the invisible assumes a
visible form; in another portion he, as Marichi
and the rest, is the progenitor of all creatures;
his third portion is time; his fourth is all
beings: and thus he becomes quadruple in
creation, invested with the quality of passion.

मन्वादिरूपश्चान्येन कालरूपोऽपरेण च॥ २५॥
सत्त्वं गुणं समाश्रित्य जगत: पुरुषोत्तम:॥ २६॥
आश्रित्य तमसो वृत्तिमन्तकाले तथा पुन:।
रुद्रस्वरूपो भगवानेकांशेन भवत्यज:॥ २७॥
अग्न्यन्तकादिरूपेण भारेनान्येन वर्त्तते। द्
कालस्वरूपो भागोऽन्य: सर्वभूतानि चापर:।॥ २८॥ `
विनाशं कुर्वतस्तस्य agile महात्मन:।
विभागकल्पना ger कथ्यते सार्वकालिकी।। २९॥

In the preservation of the world he is, in
one portion. Visnu; in another portion he is
Maun and the other patriarchs; he is time in a
third; and all beings in a fourth portion: and
thus, endowed with the property of goodness,
Purusottama preserves the world. When he
assumes the property of darkness, at the end of
all things, the unborn deity becomes in one
portion Rudra; in another, the destroying fire,
in a third, time; and in a fourth, all beings: and
thus, in a quadruple form, he is the destroyer
of the world. This, Brahman, is the fourfold
condition of the deity at all seasons,

ब्रह्मा दक्षादय: कालस्तथैवाखिलजन्तव:।
विभूतयो हरेरेता जगत: सृष्टिहेतव:।। ३०॥
विष्णुर्मन्वादय: काल: सर्वभूतानि च feat!
स्थितेर्निमित्तभूतस्य विष्णोरेता विभूतय:।। ३ १॥
रुद्रकालान्तकाद्याश्च समस्ताश्चैव जन्तव:।
चतुर्धा प्रलयायैता जनार्द्दनविभूतय:।। ३ २॥
जगदादौ तथा मध्ये सृष्टिरा प्रलयाद् द्विज।
धात्रा मरीचिमिश्रैश्च frat जन्तुभिस्तथा।। ३३॥
Wer सृजत्यादिकाले मरीचिप्रमुखास्तत:।

उत्पादयन्त्यपत्यानि जन्तवश्च प्रतिक्षणम्।। ३ ४॥
न कालेन विना gen सृष्टिनिष्पादको द्विज।
न प्रजापतय: Wa न चैवाखिलजन्तव:।। ३५॥

चतुर्धा देवदेवस्य यैत्रेय प्रलये तथा।। ३६॥

Brahma, Daksa, time, and all creatures are
the four energies of Hari, which are the causes
of creation. Visnu, Manu and the rest, time,
and all creatures are the four energies of
Visnu, which are the causes of duration.
Rudra, the destroying fire, time and _ all
creatures are the four energies of Janarddana
that are exerted for universal dissolution. In
the beginning and the duration of the world,
until the period of its end, creation is the work
of Brahmé, the patriarchs, and living animals.
Brahma creates in the beginning; then the
patriarchs beget progeny; and then animals
incessantly multiply their kinds: but Brahm is
not the active agent in creation, independent of
time; neither are the patriarchs, nor living
animals. So. in the periods of creation and of
dissolution the four portions of the god of gods
are equally essential.

यत्किंञ्चित् youd येन सत्त्वजातेन & द्विज।

तस्य सृज्यस्य सम्भूतौ तत् wd वै हरेस्तनु:।। ३७॥

हन्ति वा यत् क्वचित् किञ्चिद् yt स्थावरजङ्गमम्।

जनार्दनस्य तद् रौद्रं मैत्रेयान्तकरं वपु:॥३८॥

एवमेव जगत्स्रष्टा जगत्पाता तथैव च।

जगद् भक्षयता चेश: समस्तस्य जनार्दन:॥३९॥

सर्गस्थित्यन्तकालेषु feta सम्प्रवर्त्तते।

YOGA UT पदं तस्यागुणं महत्।। ४०॥

तत्त्वज्ञानमयं aft स्वसंवेद्यमनौपमम्।

चतु-प्रकारं तदपि स्वरूपं परमात्मन:।। ४१॥

Whatever, oh Brahman, is engendered by

any living being, the body of Hari is
cooperative in the birth of that being; so
whatever destroys any existing thing, movable
or stationary, at any time, is the destroying

form of Janarddana as Rudra. Thus Janarddana
is the creator, the preserver, and the destroyer
