516

THE VISNU-PURANAM

it be thy pleasure, return to Svarga. This is the
solicitation of the celestials. But should such
not be thy will. then remain here as long as it
may be desirable to thy dependants."*
श्रीभगवानुवाच

यत्त्वमात्याखिलं दूत वेदमयेतदहमप्युत।

प्रारब्ध एव हि HAT यादवानामपि क्षय:॥ २१॥

भुवो नाद्यापि भारोऽयं यादवैरनिवर्हितै:।

अवतार्य्य करोम्येतत् सप्तरात्रेण सत्वर:॥२२॥

यथा गृहीताम्मभोधेर्दत्त्वाहं द्वारकाभुवम्।

यादवानुपसंहृत्य यास्यामि त्रिदिचालयम्॥ २३॥

प्राप्त एवास्मि मन्तव्यो देवेन्द्रेण तथा सुरें:॥२४॥

जरासन्धादयो येऽन्ये निहता भारहेतव:।

क्षितेस्तेभ्य: कुमारोऽपि यदूनां नापचीयते।। २५॥

wet सुमहाभारमवतार्य्य क्षितेरहम्।

यास्याम्यमरलोकस्य पालनाय ब्रवीहि तान् ॥ २६॥

To this Krsna replied, “All that you have
said I am well aware of the destruction of the
Yadavas by me has commenced. The burdens
of the earth are not removed until the Yadavas
are extirpated. I will effect this also in my
descent, and quickly; for it shall come to pass
in seven nights. When I have restored the land
of Dvaraka to the ocean, and annihilated the
race of Yadu, I will proceed to the mansions of
the immortals. Apprise the gods, that, having
abandoned my human body, and accompanied
by Sankarsana, I will then return to them. The
tyrants that oppressed the earth, Jardsandha
and the rest, have been killed; and a youth,
even of thc race of Yadu, is, no less than they,
an encumbrance. When therefore I have taken
away this great weight upon earth, I will return
to protect the sphere of the celestials. Say this
to them.”

षराशर उवाच
इत्युक्तो वासुदेवेन Sage: प्रणम्य तम्।
aaa दिव्यया गत्या देवराजान्तिकं ययौ।। २७॥
भगवानप्यथोत्पातान् दिव्यभौमान्तरीक्षगान्।

ददर्श द्वारकापुरय्यां विनाशाय दिवानिशम्।। २ ८॥

तान् FRAT यादवानाह षश्यध्वमतिदारुणान्।

महोत्पातान् शमायैषां प्रभासं याम मा चिरम् ॥। २९॥

Pardgara continued— The messenger of the
gods. having received this reply, bowed, and
took his heavenly course to the king of the
gods, The mighty Krsna siow beheld signs and
portents both in earth and heaven,
prognosticating, day and night, the ruin of
Dvaraka.’ Showing these to the Yadavas, he
said, "See; behold these fearful phenomena :
let us hasten to Prabhdsa, to avert these
omens.”

पराशर उवाच

एवमुक्ते तु कृष्णेन यादवप्रवरस्तत:।

महाभागवत: we प्रणिपत्योद्धवो हरिम्॥३०॥

भगवन् यन्मया कार्य्य तदाज्ञापय सामप्रतम्।

मन्ये कुलमिदं सर्वं भगवान् संहरिष्यति।

नाशायास्य निमित्तानि कुलस्याच्युत लक्षये।। ३ 211

When he had thus spoken to the eminent
Yadava, the illustrious Uddhava saluted and
said to him, “Tell me, O lord, what it is proper
that I should do, for it seems to me that you
will destroy all this race: the signs that are
manifest declare nothing less than the
annihilation of'the tribe.” Then Krsna replied
to him,

श्रीभगवानुवाच

Ted त्वं दिव्यया गत्या मत्प्रसादसमुत्थया।

वदरीमाश्रमं yet ग्धमादनपर्वते।। ३ २॥

नर-नारायणस्थाने तत्पावित्महीतले।

मन्मना मत्प्रसादेन aa सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि।। ३ ३॥

ard स्वर्गं गमिष्यामि उपसंहृत्य वै कुलम्।

द्वारकाञ्च मया त्यक्तां समुद्र: प्लावयिष्यति ।। ३४॥

Krsna said— “Do you go by a celesial route
which my favour shall provide you, to the holy
place Badarikasrama, in the Gandhamadana
mountain, the shrine of Naranarayana; and on

that spot, sanctified by them, you. by
meditating on me, shall obtain perfection
