178

THE VISNU-PURANAM

मार्जार-कुक्कुटच्छाग-श्व-वराह-विहङ्गमान्।
पोषयन्नरकं याति तमेव द्विजसत्तम।। १९॥

सूची माहिषिकश्चैव पर्वकारी च यो द्विज:।। २०॥।
आगारदाही मित्रघ्न: शाकुनिर्ग्रमयाजक:।
रुधिरान्धे पतन्त्येते सोमं विक्रीणते च ये।। 2 eH
भधुहा ग्रामहन्ता च याति वैतरणीं नर:।
रेत:पातादिकर्त्तरो मर्यादाभेदिनो fe ये।

ते कृष्णे यान्त्यशौचाश्च कुहकाजीविनश्च I २२॥

He who takes unlawful gifts goes to the
Adhomukha (or head inverted) hell; as does
one who offers sacrifices to improper objects,
and an observer of the stars (for the prediction
of events). He who eats by himself sweetmeats
mixed with his rice,°’and a Brahmana who
vends Lac, flesh, liquors, sesamum, or salt, or
one who commits violence, fall into the hell
(whcre matter nows, or; Pityavaha; as do they
who rear cats. cocks, goats, dogs, hogs, or
birds. Public performers,® fishcrmen, the
follower of one born in adultery, a poisoner,
an informer, one who lives by his wife's
prostitution’ one who attends to secular affairs
on the days of the Parvas (or full and new
moon. etc.),* an incendiary, a treacherous
friend, a soothsayer, one who _ performs
religious ceremonies for rustics, and those
who sell the acid Asclepias, used in sacrifices,

पुत्रैरध्यापिता ये च ते पतन्ति श्वभोजने।। २५॥

He who want only cuts down trees goes to
the Asipatravana hell (the leaves of whose
trees are swords): and a tender on sheep, and
hunter of deer, to the hell termed Vahnijvala
(or fiery name); as do those who apply fire to
unbaked vessels (potters) . The violator of a
vow, and one who breaks the rules of his
order, falls into the Sandansga (or hell of
pincers): and the religious student who sleeps
in the day, and is, though unconsciously,
defiled; and they who, though mature, are
instructed in sacred literature by their children,
receive punishment in the hell called
Svabhojana (where they feed upon dogs).

एते चान्ये च नरका: शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।

येषु दुष्कृतकर्माण: पच्यन्ते यातनागता:॥ २६॥
यथैव पातान्योतानि तथान्यानि सहस्रश:।

RT UT पुरुषैर्नरकान्तरगोचरै:।। २७॥
वर्णाश्रमविरुद्धञ्च at कुर्वन्ति ये नरा:।
कर्मणा मनसा वाचा निरयेषु पतन्ति ते॥ २८॥

These hells, and hundreds and thousands of
others, are the places in which sinners pay the
penalty of their crimes. As numerous as are
the offences that men commit, so many are the
hells in which they are punished : and all who
deviate from the duties imposed upon them by
their caste and condition, whether in thought,
word, or deed, are sentenced to punishment in

go to the Rudhirandha hell (whose wells are of the regions of the damned.”

blood). He who destroys a _ bee-hive, or
pillages a hamler, is condemned to the
Vaitarani hell. He who causes impotence,
trespasses on others’ lands, is impure, or who
lives by fraud, is punished in the hell called
(black, or) Krsna.

असिपत्रवनं याति वनच्छेदी sea य:।

औरभ्रिका मृगव्याधा वहिज्वाले पतन्ति वै।। २३॥

याम्त्येते द्विज! तत्रैव ये चापाकेषु बह्निदा:।

व्रतानां लोपको यश्च स्वाश्रमाद् विच्युतश्च य:।। २४॥

सन्दंशयातनामध्ये पततस्तावुभावपि।

दिवास्वप्ने व स्कन्दन्ते ये नरा ब्रह्मचारिण:।

देव्राश्चग्धोप्रुखान्सवक्खि: पश्यन्ति नारकान्।। २९॥
स्थावरा: क्रिमयोऽब्जाश्च पक्षिण: षशवो नरा:।
धार्मिकास्त्रिदशास्तद्वन्मोक्षिणश्च यथाक्रमम्॥ ३ ०॥
सहस्रभागा: प्रथमा द्वितीयानुक्रमास्तथा।
सर्वे Ba महाभाग! यावन्मुक्तिसमाश्रया:।। ३ eH
`यावन्तो जन्तव: स्वर्गे तावन्तो नरकौकस:।
पापकृद् याति नरकं प्रायश्चित्तपराङ्मुख:॥ ३ २॥

The gods in heaven are beheld by the

inhabitants of hel!, as they move with their
heads inverted; whilst the gods, as they cast
