BOOK VI, CHAP. 7

555

अनन्यातिशयाबाधं परं निर्वाणमृच्छति।। 2 eu

When that dust is washed away by the
bland water of real knowledge, then the
weariness of bewilderment sustained by the
wayfarer through repeated births is removed.
When that weariness is relieved, the internal
man is at peace, and he obtains that supreme
felicity which is unequalled and undisturbed.

निर्वाणमय एवायमात्मा ज्ञानमयोऽमल:।
दु:खाज्ञानमला ATT: प्रकृतेस्ते YF नात्मन:।। २२॥
शब्दोद्रेकादिकान् arated करोति यथा मुने।। २३॥

This soul is (of its own nature) pure, and
composed of happiness and wisdom. The
properties of pain, ignorance, and impurity,
are those of nature (Prakrti), not of soul. There
is no affinity between fire and water, but when
the latter is placed over the former in a caldron
it bubbles and boils, and exhibits the
properties of fire.

तथात्मा WHR: सङ्गादहम्मानादिदूषित:।

भजते प्राकृतान् TARA हि सोऽव्यय:।। २४॥
तदेतत् कथितं बीजमविद्यायास्तव प्रभो।

क्लेशानाञ्च क्षयकरं योगादन्यन्न विद्यते।। २५॥

In like manner, when soul is associated
with Prakrti it is vitiated by egotism and the
rest, and assumes the qualities of grosser
nature, although essentially distinct from
them, and incorruptible. Such is the seed of
ignorance, as I have explained it to you. There
is but one cure of worldly sorrows, the
practice of devotion; no other is known.”

खाण्डिक्य sara

तन्तु ge महाभाग। योगं योगविदुत्तम।
विज्ञातयोगशास्त्रार्थस्त्वमस्यां निमिसन्ततौ॥ २६॥
“Then,” said Khandikya, “do you, who are

the chief of those versed in contemplative
devotion, explain to me what that is; for in the
race of the descendants of Nimi? you are best
acquainted with the sacred writings in which it
is taught.”

केशिध्वज उवाच
योगस्वरूपं खाण्डिक्य! saat गदतो मम।
यत्र स्थितो न च्यवते प्राप्य ब्रह्मलयं मूनि: ।। २७॥
मन एव मनुष्याणां कारणं बन्धमोक्षयो:।
बनधाय विषयासङ्गि yard निर्विषयं तथा।। २८॥

“Hear,” replied Kesidhvaja, “the account of
the nature of contemplative devotion}, which I
impart to you, and by perfection in which the
sage attains resolution into Brahma, and never
suffers birth again. The mind of man is the
cause both of his bondage and his liberation:
its addiction to the objects of sense is the
means of his bondage; its separation from
objects of sense is the means of his freedom.

विषयेभ्य: समाहृत्य विज्ञानात्मा मनो मुनि:।
चिन्तयेन्मुक्तये तेन ब्रह्मभूतं परभेश्वरम्॥२९॥
विकार्यमात्मन: शक्त्या लोहमाकर्षको यथा।।३०॥

The sage who is capable of discriminative
knowledge must therefore restrain his mind
from all the objects of sense, and therewith
meditate upon the supreme being, who is one
with spirit, in order to attain liberation; for that
supreme spirit attracts to itself him who
meditates upon it, and who ts of the same
nature, as the load stone attracts the iron by the
virtue which is common to itself-and to its
products‘.

आत्मप्रयत्नसापेक्षा विशिष्टा या मनोगति:।
तस्य ब्रह्मणि संयोगो योग इत्यभिधीयते।। ३ eH
एवमत्यन्तवैशिष्ट्ययुक्त कर्मोपलक्षण:।

यस्य योगस्य वै योगी मुमुक्षुरभिधीयते।। ३ २॥

Contemplative devotion is the union with
Brahma, effected by that condition of mind
which has attained perfection through those
exercise which complete the control of self:
and he whose contemplative devotion is
characterized by the property of such absolute
perfection, is in truth a sage, expectant of final

Jiberation from the world.
