114

THE VISNU-PURANAM

sensual pleasures, ever propose, and never
attain final beatitude: they the thirsting.
Devoted in childhood to play, and in youth to
pleasure, ignorant and impotent they find that
old age is come upon them. Therefore even in
childhood let the embodied soul acquire
discriminative wisdom, and, independent of
the conditions of infancy, youth, or age, strive
incessantly to be freed.

तदेतद् वो मयाख्यातं ale जानीत नानृतम्।
तदस्मत्प्रीतये विष्णु: स्मर्य्यतां बन्धमुक्तिद:।।७७॥
आयास: स्मरणे कोऽस्य स्मृतो Beals शोभनम्।
पापक्षयश्च भवति स्मरतां तमहर्निशम्॥७८॥
सर्वभूतस्थिते तस्मिन् मतिर्मैत्री दिवानिशम्।

भवतां जाययामेवं सर्वक्लेशान् प्रहास्यथ॥७९॥

This, then, is what I declare to you; and
since you know that it is not untrue, do vou,
out of regard to me, call to your minds Visnu,
the libcrator from all bondage. What difficulty
is there in thinking upon him, who, when
remembered, bestows prosperity; and by
recalling whom to memory, day and night, all
sin is cleansed away? Let all your thoughts
and affections be fixed on him, who is present
in all beings, and you shall laugh at every care.

तापत्रयेणाभिहतं यदेतदखिलं जगत्।

तदा शोच्येषु भूतेषु RE प्राज्त: कराति क:॥८०॥
अथ भद्राणि भूतानि हीनशक्तिरहं परम्।

qa तथापि कुर्वीत हानिर्देषफलं यत:॥ ८ git
बद्धवैराणि भूतानि द्वेषं कुर्वन्ति Ve तत:।
शोच्यान्यहोऽतिमोहेन व्याप्तानीति मनीषिणा॥ ८ २॥

The whole world is suffering under a triple
affliction’ What wise man would feel hatred
towards beings who are objects of
compassion? If fortune be propitious to them,
and I am unable to partake of the like
enjoyments, yet wherefore should I cherish
malignity towards those who are more
prosperous than myself? I should rather
sympathise with their happiness; for the
suppression of malignant feelings is of itself a

reward.® If beings are hostile, and indulge in
hatred, they are objects of pity to the wise, as
encompassed by profound delusion.

एते भिन्नादृशा दैत्या विकल्पा: कथिता मया।

कृत्वाभ्युपगमं तत्र संक्षेप: श्रूयतां WA ८३॥

विस्तार: सर्वभूतस्य विष्णोविश्वमिदं जगत्।

द्रष्टव्यमात्मवत् तस्मादभेदेन विचक्षणै:॥ ८४॥

तथा यत्नं करिष्यामो यथा प्राप्स्याम निर्वृतिम्॥ ८५॥

या नाम्निना न वार्केण नेन्दुना नैववायुना।

पर्जन्यवरुणाभ्यां वा न सिद्धैर्न च राक्षसै:।। ८६॥

न यक्षैर्न च dees च fat:

न मनुष्यैर्न पशुभिदेषिर्नैवात्मसम्भवै:।। ८७॥

ज्वराक्षिरोगाऽतीसार-प्लीह-गुल्मादिकैस्तथा।

द्वेषेर्यामत्सराद्यैर्वा रागलोभादिभि: क्षयम्।। ८ ८॥

न चान्यैर्नीयते कैश्चिन्नित्या ह्यत्यन्तनिर्मला।

तामाप्नोति मलं त्यक्त्वा केशवे ete संस्थिते॥ ८ ९॥

These are the reasons for repressing hate

which are adapted to the capacities of those
who see the deity distinct from his creatures.
Hear, briefly, what influences those who have
approached the truth. This whole world is but
a manifestation of Visnu, who is identical with
all things : and it if therefore to be regarded by
the wise as not differing from, but as the same
with themselves. Let us therefore lay aside the
angry passions of our race, and so strive that
we obtain that perfect, pure, and eternal
happiness, which shall be beyond the power of
the elements or their deities, of fire, of the sun,
of the moon, of wind, of Indra, of the regent of
the sea; which shall be unmolested by spirits
of air or earth; by Yaksas, Daityas, or their
chiefs; by the serpent-gods or monstrous
demigods of Svarga; which shall be
uninterrupted by men or beasts, or by the
infirmities of human nature; by bodily
sickness and disease,” or hatred, envy, malice,
passion, or desire; which nothing shall molest,
and which every one who fixes his whole heart
on KeSava shall enjoy.
