BOOK I, CHAP. 2

त्वक चक्षुर्नासिका जिह्वा श्रोत्रमत्र च पञ्चमम्।४६॥
शब्दादीनामवाप्त्यर्थं बुद्धियुक्तानि वै fan
पायूपस्थौ करौ wel वाक च मैत्रेय पञ्चमी।४७॥
विसर्गशिल्पगत्युक्ति: at तेषाञ्च कथ्यते।

Then wind becoming productive, produced
the rudiment of form (colour); whence light
(or fire) proceeded, of which, form (colour) is
the attribute; and the rudiment of touch
enveloped the wind with the rudiment of
colour. Light becoming productive, produced
the rudiment of taste; whence proceed all
juices in which flavour resides; and the
rudiment of colour invested the juices with the
rudiment of taste. The waters becoming
productive, engendered the rudiment of smell;
whence an aggregate (earth) originates, of
which smell is the property”. In each several
element resides its peculiar rudiment; thence
the property of tanmatrata”’ (type or rudiment)
is ascribed to these elements. Rudimental
elements are not endowed with qualities, and
therefore they are neither soothing, nor
terrific, nor stupefying’®. This is the elemental
creation, proceeding from the principle of
egotism affected by the property of darkness.
The organs of sense are said to be the
passionate produces of the same principle,
affected by foulness; and the ten divinities’’
proceed from egotism affected by the principle
or goodness; as does Mind, which is the
eleventh. The organs of sense are ten: of the
ten, five are the skin. eye, nose, tongue, and
car; the object of which, combined with
Intellect, is the apprehension of sound and the
rest: the organs of excretion and procreation,
the hands, the feet, and the voice, form the
other five; of which excretion, generation,
manipulation, motion, and speaking, are the
several acts,

आकाशवायुतेजांसि सलिलं पृथिवी तथा।।४८॥
शब्दादिभिर्गुणैर्ब्रह्मन्! संयुक्तान्युत्तरोत्तरै:।
शान्ता घोराश्च मूढाश्च विशेषास्तेन ते स्मृता:॥४९॥

नाशक्नुवन् प्रजा: स्रष्टुमसमागम्य HHT: HY ०॥।

Then, ether, air, light, water, and earth,
severally united with the properties of sound
and the rest, existed as distinguishable
according to their qualities, as soothing,
terrific, or stupefying; but possessing various
energies, and being unconnected, they could
not, without combination, create living beings,
not having blended with each other.

समेत्यान्योऽन्यसंयोगं परस्परसमाश्रया:।
एकसंघातलक्ष्याश्च सम्प्राप्यैक्यमशेषत:।। ५ BH

पुरुषाधिष्ठितत्वाच्च प्रधानानुग्रहेण च।

महदाद्या विशेषान्ता ह्यण्डमुत्पादयन्ति ते॥। ५ २॥
तत्क्रमेण विवृद्धन्तु जलबुद्रुदवत्समम्।
भूतेभ्योऽण्डं महाबुद्धे! FHL तदुदकेशयम्।
प्राकृतं ब्रह्मरूपस्य विष्णो: संस्थानमुत्तमम्॥५३॥
तत्राव्यक्तस्वरूपोऽसौ व्यक्तरूपी जगत्पति:।

विष्णुब्रह्मस्वरूपेण wate व्यवस्थित:।। ५४॥

Having combined, therefore, with one
another, they assumed, through their mutual
association, the character of one mass of entire
unity; and from the direction of spirit, with the
acquiescence of the indiscrete Principle”,
Intellect and the rest, to the gross elements
inclusive, formed an egg”, which gradually
expended like a bubble of water. This vase
egg, O sage, compounded of the elements, and
resting on the waters, was the excellent natural
abode of Visnu in the from of Brahma; and
there Visnu, the lord of the universe, whose
essence is inscrutable, assumed a perceptible
form, and even he himself abided in it in the
character of Brahma.”

मेरुरुन्नमभूत् तस्य जरायुश्च महीधरा:।

गरभेदिकं समुद्राश्च तस्यासन् सुमहात्मन:।।५५॥
साद्गिद्वीपसमुद्रास्तु सज्योतिर्लोकसङ्गृह:।

. तस्मिन्नण्डेऽभवद् fam! सदेवासुरमानुष:। ५६॥
वारिवह्रयनिलाकाशैस्ततो भूतादिना बहि:।

ga दशगुणैरण्डं भूतादिर्महता तथा।॥५७॥
अव्यक्तेनावृतो ब्रह्मंस्तै: सर्वै: सहितो महान्।
