BOOK V, CHAP. {

417

सुरामांसोपहारैस्तु भक्ष्यभोज्यैश्च पूजिता।

नृणामशेषकामांस्त्वं प्रसन्ना सम्प्रदास्यसि।। ८५॥

ते wa सर्वदा भद्रे! मत्प्रसादादसंशयम्।

असन्दिग्धा भविष्यन्ति mas देवि! यथोदितम्॥ ८६॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चामांशे प्रथम: अध्याय:।

You are wealth, progeny, fame, patience,
heaven and earth, fortitude, modesty, nutrition,
dawn and every other female (form or
property). They who address you morning and
afternoon with reverence and praise and call
you Arya, Durga, Vedagarbha, Ambika,
Bhadra, Bhadrakali, Ksemi or Kse-mankari,
shalt receive from my bounty whatever they
desire. Propitiated with offerings of wine and
flesh and various viands, you shall bestow
upon mankind all their prayers. Through my
favour all men shall ever have faith in you.
Assured of this, go, goddess and execute my
commands."

NOTES

1. The whole of this book is dedicated to the
biography of Krsna. Many of the Puranas omit this
subject altogether or only allude to it occasionally.
In others it is equally prominent. The Brahma
Purana gives the story exactly in the same words as
our text: which has the best right to them may be
questioned; but, as it is usually met with, the
Brahma Purana is a very heterogeneous
compilation. The Hari Varga has a narrative more
detailed than that of the text, with additions and
embellishments of its own. The Brahma Vaivartta
throughout celebrates the acts of Krsna; and one
portion of it. the Krsna Janma Khanda, especially
describes his boyhood and youth. The incidents are
the same in general as those in the text, but they are
lost amidst interminable descriptions of Krsna’s
sports with the Gopis and with his mistress Radha,
a person not noticed elsewhere; the whole is in a
style indicative of a modern ongin. The Agni
Purana and Padma Purana (Uttara Khanda) have
accounts of Krsna, but they are mere summaries,
compiled evidently from other works. The principal
authority for the adventures of Krsna is the
Bhagavata, the tenth book of which is exclusively
devoted to him. It is this work which has, no doubt,

mainly extended the worship of Krsna, as its
popularity is evinced by its having been translated
into all the spoken languages of India professing to
have a literature. The Prem-sagar. its Hindi
version, is well known; but there are also
translations in Mahratta, Telugu, Tamil. 1t does not
seem likely, however, that the Visnu Purina has
copied the Bhagavata; for although its greater
conciseness may sometimes look like abridgement,
yet the descriptions are generally of a more simple
and antiquated character. Here, as usual, the
Mahabharata is no doubt the earliest extant
authority; but it is not the earliest, for whilst it
omits to narrate most of his personal adventures
unconnected with his alliance with the Pandavas, it
often alludes to them and names repeatedly his
capital, his wives and his progeny, It also devotes a
section, the Mausala Parva, to the destruction of the
Yadavas. The story of Krsna the prince and hero
must have been complete when the Mahabharata
was compiled. It is doubtful, however, if Krsna the
boy and his adventures at Vmdavan, were not
subsequent inventions. There are no allusions to
them in the poem, of an unsuspicious nature. The
only ones that | have met with are contained in a
speech by Sisupala. Sabha Parva, vol. 1. p. 360, in
which he reviles Krsna; but they may easily have
been interpolated. There may be others scattered
through the poem, but | havc not observed them.

2. The notices of Krgna’s origin and character in
various passages of the Mahabharata are by no
means consistent and indicate different dates at
least. In an address to him by Arjuna, Vana Parva,
vol. 1. p. 426, he is said to have passed thousands
of years in various holy places, engaged in arduous
penances. He is frequently identified with the Rsi
Narayana or he and Arjuna are said to be Nara and
Narayana ; @ चवाहं च कौन्तेय नरनारायणौ स्मृतौ। In the Dana-
dharma he is represented as a worshipper of Siva
and propitiating him and his wife Uma and
receiving as boons from them wives and children.
As a warrior and prince he is always on the scene;
but he is repeatedly called an Arhga or portion of
Visnu; whilst in a great number of places he is
identified with Visnu or Narayana and _ is
consequently ‘all things.’ This latter is his character,
of course, amongst the Vaisnavas, agreeably to the
text of the Bhagavata : कृष्णास्तु भगवान् स्वयं। ‘Krsna is
the lord (Visnu) himself.’
