BOOK VI, CHAP. 1

529

at सैव मैत्रेय प्रायश्चित्तक्रियां weit 23 11
सर्वमेव कलौ शास्त्रं यस्य यद्वचनं द्विज।
देवताश्च कलौ सर्वा: सर्व: सर्वस्य चाश्रम:॥ १४॥

उपवासस्तथायासो वित्तोत्सर्गस्तथा कलौ।
धर्मो यथाभिरुचितैरनुष्ठानैरनुष्ठित:।। १५॥
वित्तेन भविता पुंसां स्वल्पेनाढ्यमद: कलौ।

The observance of caste, order, and
institutes will not prevail in the Kali age, nor
will that of the ceremonial enjoined by the
Sama, Rk, and Yajur Vedas. Marriages in this
age will not be conformable to the ritual, nor
will the rules that connect the spiritual
preceptor and his disciple be in force. The
laws that regulate the conduct of husband and
wife will be disregarded, and oblations to the
gods with fire no longer be offered. In
whatever family he may be born, a powerful
and rich man will be held entitled to espouse
maidens of every tribe. A regenerate man will
be initiated in any way whatever and such acts
of penance as may be performed will be
unattended by any results‘. Every text will be
scripture that people choose to think so‘; alt
gods will be gods to them that worship them;
and all orders of life will be common alike to
all persons. In the Kali age, fasting austerity,
liberality, practised according to the pleasure
of those by whom they are observed, will
constitute righteousness. Pride of wealth will
be inspired by very insignificant possessions.

स्त्रीणां रूपमदश्चैव केशैरेव भविष्यति।। १६॥
सुवर्णमणिरत्नादौ वस्त्रै चापि art गते।

कलौ ferat भविष्यन्ति तदा केशैरलङ्कृ ता:।॥ १७॥
परित्यक्षन्ति rate वित्तहीनं तथा स्रिय:।

wat भविष्यति कलो वित्तवानेव योषिताम्॥ १८॥

Pride of beauty will be prompted by (on
other personal charm than fine) hair. Gold,
jewels, diamonds, clothes, will all have
perished, and then hair will be the only
ornament with which women can decorate
themselves. Wivcs will desert their husbands,
when they lose thcir property; and they only

who are wealthy will be considered by women
as their lords.

यो यो ददाति aget स स स्वामी तदा नॄणाम्।
स्वामित्वहेतु: सम्बन्धो भावी नाभिजनस्तदा।। १९॥
गृहान्ता द्रव्यसङ्घाता द्रव्यान्ता च TAT मति:।
अर्थाश्चात्मोपभोगान्ता भविष्यन्ति कलौ युगे।। २०॥
स्रिय: कलौ भविष्यन्ति स्वैरिण्यो ललितस्पृहा:।
अन्यायावाप्तवित्तेषु पुरुषाश्च स्पृहालव:।। २१॥

He who gives away much money will be
master of men; and family descent will no
longer be a title of supremacy. Accumulated
treasures will be expended on (ostentatious)
dwellings. The minds of men will be wholly
occupied in acquiring wealth; and wealth will
be spent solely on selfish gratifications.
Women will follow their inclinations, and be
ever fond of pleasure. Men will fix their
desires upon riches, even though dishonestly
acquired.

अभ्यर्थितोऽपि year स्वार्थहानिं न मानव:।

पणारद्धार्द्धमात्रेपि करिष्यति तदा द्विज॥ २२॥

समानं पौरुषञ्चेतो भावि विप्रेषु वै कलौ।

क्षीरप्रदानसम्बन्धि भावि गोषु च गौरवम्॥ २३॥

अनावृष्टिभयप्राया: प्रजा: क्षुद्धयकातरा:।

भविघ्यन्ति तदा Wal गगनासक्तदृष्टय:।। २४॥

कन्दपर्णफलाहारास्तापसा इव मानवा:।

आत्मानं पातयिष्यन्ति तदा वृष्टयादिदु:खिता:।। २५॥

No man will part with the smallest fraction
of the smallest coin’, though entreated by a
friend. Men of all degrees will conceit
themselves to be equal with Brahmans. Cows
will be held in esteem only as they supply
milk’. The people will be almost always in
dread of dearth, and apprehensive of scarcity;
and will hence ever be watching thc
appearances of the sky: they will all live, like
anchorets, upon leaves and roots and fruit, and
put a period to their lives through fear of
famine and want.

प्रापस्यन्ति व्याहतसुखप्रमोदा मानवा: कलौ।। २६॥
