BOOK V, CHAP. 38

523

सान्तानिकादयों वा ते याचमाना निराकृता:।
अगम्यस्त्रीरतिर्वा त्वं त्तेनासि विगतप्रभ:। ३ ८॥
भुक्तोऽप्रदाय विप्रेभ्य एको मिष्टमथी भवान्।

fa या कृष्णवित्तानि eat भवतार्जुन॥ ३ ९॥
कच्चित्वं शूर्पवातस्य गोचरत्वं गतोऽर्जुन।
दुष्टचक्षुर्हतो वापि नि:श्रीक: कथमन्यथा।। ४०॥
स्पृष्टो नखाम्भसा चाथ घटाम्भ:प्रोक्षितोऽपि वा।
ततेनातीवासि विच्छायो न्यूनैर्वा युधि निर्जित:।। ४९॥।

Then Jisnu was sorely distressed, and
lamented bitterly , exclaiming, “Alas! alas! I
am deserted by my lord!” and he wept: and in
that instant the bow and heavenly arms, his car
and steeds, perished entirely, like a donation to
an unlearned Brahman. “Resistless,” said he,
“are the decress of fate, by whom feebleness
has been inflicted upon me, deprived of my
illustrious friend, and victory given to the
base. These two arms are mine; mine is this
fist; this is my place; J am Arjuna: but without
that righteous aid all these are pityless. The
valour of Arjuna, the strength of Bhima, was
all his work; and without him I am overcome
by peasants: it cannot be from any other
cause.” So saying, Arjuna went to the city of
Mathura and there installed and Y&dava
prince, Vajra, as its king. There he beheld
Vyasa, who was living in a wood, and he
approached the sage, and saluted him
respectfully. The Muni surveyed him for some
time, as he lay prostrate at his feet, and said to
him, “How is it that 1 see you thus shorn of
your lustre? Have you been guilty of illicit
intercourse with women, or of the death of
Brahman? Or have you suffered some
grievous disappointment? that you are so
dejected. Have your prayers for progeny, or
other goods gifts, proved fruitless? Or have
you indulged improper passions? that your
lustre is so dim. Or are you one that devours
the meal he has given to the Brahmans? Say,
Arjuna, have you seized upon the substance of
the poor? Has the wind of winnowing basket
lighted upon you? or has an evil eye gazed

upon you, Arjuna? that you look thus
miserable. Have you been touched by the
water of a fingernail? or has the water of a
water-jar sprinkled you? or, what is most
probably the case, have you been beaten by
your inferiors in battle?”

तत: पार्थो विनि:श्चस्य श्रूयतां भगवन्निति।

प्रोक्त्वा यथावदाचष्ट व्यासायात्मपराभवम्।। ४ २॥
अर्जुन उवाच

यद्बलं यच्च नस्तेजो यद्वीर्यं यत्पराक्रम।

चा श्रीश्छाया च न: सोऽस्मान् परित्यज्य गतो हर:।॥ ४३

इतरेणेव महता स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषिणा।

हीना वयं मुने तेन जातास्तृणमया Sa ४४॥

अस्त्राणां सायकानाञ्च गाण्डीवस्य तथा मम्।

सारता याभवन् मूलं स गत: पुरुषोत्तम:।। ४५॥

चस्यावलोकनादस्मान् श्रीर्जय: TIGA: |

न तत्याज स गोविन्दस्त्यक्त्वास्मान् भगवान् गत:।४६॥

भीष्मद्रोणाङ्गराजाद्यास्तथा दुर्योधनादय:।

यत्प्रभावेण निर्दग्धा: स कृष्णस्त्यक्तवान् भुवम्।। ४७॥

निर्यै-विन-हतश्रीका भ्रष्टच्छायेव मेदिनी। ।

विभाति ara नैकोऽहं विरहे तस्य चक्रिण:।। ४८॥

यस्यादुभावाद् भीष्माद्यैर्मयग्नौ शलभायितम्।

विना तेनाद्य कृष्णेन गोपालैरस्मि निर्जित:।। ४९॥

Arjuna, having sighed deeply, related to
Vyasa all the circumstances of his
discomfiture, and continued : “Hari, who was
our strength, our might, our heroism, our
prowess, our prosperity, our brightness, has
left us, and departed. Deprived of him, our
friend, illustrious, and ever kindly speaking,
we have become as feeble as if made of straw.
Purusottama, who was the living vigour of my
weapons, my arrows and my bow, is gone. As
long as we looked upon him, fortune, fame,
wealth, dignity never abandoned us: but
Govinda is gone from amongst us. That Krsna
has quitted earth, through whose power Bhis
ma, Drona, the king do Anga, Duryodhana,
and the rest, were consumed. Not I alone, but
Earth, has grown old, miserable and lustreless,
