118

THE VISNU-PURANAM

भूयो न वक्ष्यसीत्येवं नैव ज्ञातोऽस्यबुद्धिमान्।। २७॥
यदास्मद्दचनान्मोहग्राहं न त्यक्ष्यते भवान्।
तत: Heat विनाशाय तव स्रक्ष्याम SAA २८॥

The priests said to him, "We preserved you,
boy, when you were about to be consumed by
fire. confiding that you would no - longer
eulogize your father's foes: we knew not how
unwise you were: but if you will not desist
form this infatuation at our advice, we shall
even proceed to perform the rites that will
inevitably descroy you." `

Wele उवाच

क: केन हन्यते जन्तुर्जन्तु: क: केन रक्ष्यते।

हन्ति रक्षति चैवात्मा ह्यसत् साधु समाचरन्॥। २९॥

To this menace. Prahlada answered, "What
living creature slays, or is slain ? what living
creature preserves, or is preserved? Each is

his own destroyer or preserver, as be follows
evil or good'."

पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्तास्तेन ते Hal दैत्यराजपुरोहिता:।
कृत्यामुत्पादयामासुरज्वालामालोज्ज्वलाकृतिम्। ३०॥
अतिभीमा समागम्यं पादन्यासक्षतक्षिति;।
शूलेन सा सुसंक्रुद्धा तं जघानाशु वक्षसि॥ ३ gi
तत् तस्य हृदयं प्राप्य शूलं बालस्य दीप्तिमत्।
जगाम खण्डितं भूमौ तत्रापि शंतधा गतम्।३ २॥
यत्रानपायी भगवान् हद्यास्ते हरिरीश्वर:।
भङ्गो भवति वज्रस्य तत्र शूलस्य का कथा।।३३॥
तानेव सा जघानाशु कृत्या नाशं जगाम च।। ३४॥
कृत्यया दह्यमानांस्तान् विलोक्य स महामति:।
त्राहि कृष्णेत्यनन्तेति वदन्नभ्यवपद्यत।। ३५॥

fearful aspect, and the earth was parched
beneath her tread, as she approached Prahlada,
and smote him with a fiery trident on the
breast. In vain! for the weapon fell, broken
into a hundred pieces, upon the ground.
Against the breast in which the imperishable
Hari resides the thunderbold would be
shivered, much more should such a weapon be
split in pieces. The magic being, then directed
against the virtuous prince by the wicked
priests, turned upon them, and, having quickly
destroyed them, disappeared. But Prahlada,
beholding them perish, hastily appealed to Krs
na, the eternal, for succour, and said,

Were उवाच
सर्वव्यापिन् जगद्रूप जगत्स्रष्टर्जनार्दन।
पाहि विप्रानिमानस्माद् दु:सहान्मनत्रपावकात्॥ ३६॥
यथा aay भूतेषु सर्वव्यापी जगद्गुरु:।
विष्णुरेव तथा ae जीवन्त्वेते पुरोहिता:॥ ३७॥
यथा सर्वगतं विष्णुं मन्यमानो न पावकम्।
चिन्तयाम्यरिपक्षेऽपि जीवन्त्वेते पुरोहिता:।॥ ३८॥
ये हन्तुमागता et यैविषं चैर्हुताशन:।
यैर्दिग्गजैरहं क्षुण्णो दष्ट: wt यैरपि।। ३९॥
तेष्वहं मित्रभावेन wa: पापोऽस्मि न क्वचित्।

तथा तेनाद्य सत्येन जीवन्त्वसुरयाजका:॥ ४०॥

“Oh Janarddana ! who are every where, the
creator and substance of the world, preserve
these Brahmans from this magical and
insupportable fire. As you are Visnu, present
in all creatures, and the protector of the world,
so let these priests be restored to life. If, whilst
devoted to the omnipresent Visnu, I think no
sinful resentment against my foes, let these
priests be restored to life. If those who have
come to slay me, those by whom poison was
given me, the fire that would have burned, the
elephants that would have crushed. and snakes

Thus spoken to by the youth, the priests of that would have stung me, have been regarded

the Daitya sovereign were incensed, and
instantly had recourse to magic incantations.
by which a female form, enwreathcd with
fierce flame, was engendered:

by me as friends; if I have been unshaken in
soul, and am without fault in your sight; then,
I implore you, let these, the priests of the

she was of Asuras, be now restored to life.
