BOOK I, CHAP. 5

33

8. This reckoning is not very easily reconciled
with the creations described, for. as presently
enumerated, the stages of creation are seven. The
commentator, however, considers the Urddhasrotas
creation, or that of the superhuman beings, to be the
same with that of the Indriyas, or senses over which
they preside; by which the number is reduced to
six.

9. This creation being the work of the supreme
spirit, TS WAT तत् कर्त्तक: सर्गो विज्ञेय इत्यर्थ: | according
to the commentator : or it might have been
understood to mean, that Brahmd was then created,
being, as we have seen, identified with Mahat,
‘active intelligence.’ or the operating will of the
Supreme. See Ch. II. Nofe 23.

10. The text is, सर्ग: सम्भूतो बुद्धिपूर्व्वक: | which is, as
rendered in the text, ‘creation preceded by, or
beginning with Buddhi. intelligence., The rules of
euphony would however admit of a mute negative
being inserted, or सम्भूतौऽबुद्धिपूर्व्वक:। ‘preceded by
ignorance.’ that is by the chief principle, crude
nature or Pradhdna. which is one with ignorance ;
but this seems to depend on notions of a later date.
and more partial adoption, than those generally
prevailing in our authority; and the first reading
therefore has been preferred, It is also to be
observed, that the first unintellectual creation was
that of immovable objects (as in p. 30-31), the
original of which is, अबुद्धिपूर्व्वक: ai: प्रादुर्भूतस्तमोमय:।
and all ambiguity of construction is avoided. The
reading is also established by the text of the Linga
Purana, which enumerates the diffcrent series of
creation in the words of the Visnu, except in this
passage, which is there transposed, with a-slight
variation of the reading. Instead of प्रथमो Wea: सर्गो
विज्ञेयो FATE: | it is VIN महत: सर्ग: सम्भूतॊ बुद्धिपूर्व्वक:।
“The first creation was that of Mahat : Intellect
being the first in manifestation.’ The reading of tae
Vayu Purana is still more tautological. but confirms
that here preferred ; प्रथमो महत: सर्गो विज्ञेयो महतस्तु स:।
See also n. 12.

11. The Anugraha creation, of which no notice
has been found in the Mahabharata seems to have
bcen borrowed from the Samkhya philosophy. It is
more particularly described in the Padma,
Markandeya, Linga and Matsya Puranas : as,
पंचमोऽनुग्रह: wh स ugal व्यवस्थित:। च
सिद्धया तुष्ठया तथैव an 'The fith is the Anugraha
creation, which is subdivided into four kinds; by

obstruction, disability, —_ perfect-ness. and
acquiescence. This is the Pratyaya sarga. or
intellectual creation. of the Sarnkhyas (S. Karika. v.
46. p. 146); the creation of which we have a notion,
or to which we give assent (Anugraha), in
contradistinction to organic creation, or that
existence of which we have sensible perception. In
its specific subdivisions it is the notion of certain
inseparable properties in the four different ordcrs of
beings : obstruction or stolidity in inanimate things;
inability or imperfection in animals : perfectibility
in man : and acquiescence or tranquil enjoyment in
gods. So aho the Vayu Purana

सिद्ध्यात्मानो मनुष्यास्तु तुषटिर्देवेषु
PERT: |

12. Or Vaikrta, derived mediately from the first
principle, through its Vikytis, productions or
developements;' and Prakrta, derived more
immediately from the chief principle itself. Mahat
and the two forms of Ahankara, or the rudimental
elements and the senses, constitute the latter class:
inanimate beings, etc. compose the former : or the
latter are considercd as the work of Brahma, whilst
the three first are evolved from Pradhana. So the
Vayu ; प्राकृतास्तु त्रय: सर्गां: कृतास्ते बुद्धिपूर्व्वका:। बुद्धिपूर्व्व
vad Ye wit ब्रह्मणस्तु ते। 'The three creations
beginning with intelligence are elemental; but the
six creations which proceed from the series of
which Intellect is the first are the works of Brahma.'

13. We must have recourse here also to other
Puranas, for the elucidation of this term. The
Kaumara creation is the creation of Rudra or
Nilalohita, a form of Siva. by Brahma, which is
subsequently described in our text, and of certain
other mind-born sons of Brahma, of whose birth the
Visnu Purana gives no further account : they are
elsewhere termed Sanat-kumara, Sananda. Sanaka,
and Sandtana, with sometimes a fifth, Rbhu, added.
These, declining to create progeny, remained, as
the name of the first implies, ever boys, kumaras;
that is, ever pure and innocent: whence their
creation is called the Kaumara. Thus the Vayu : 38
ससर्ज वै ब्रह्मा मानसानात्मन: समान्। सनन्दनं ससनकं विद्वांसं च
सनातनं। सनत्कुमारमेव च न ते लोके तु सर्ज्जन्ते निरपेक्षा। सनातना:।
And the Litga has, यथोत्पन्न: सदा Wa BAK A इहोच्यते।
तस्मात् सनत्कुमारेति नामास्तीह प्रकीर्तित:। ‘Bring ever as he
was born, he is here called a youth, and hencc his
name is well known as Sanatkumara.' This
authority makes Sanatkumara and Rbhu the two
