242

THE VISNU-PURANAM

सैन्धवा मुञ्जिकेशाश्च द्विधा भिन्नास्तिधा पुन:।

मक्षत्रकल्पो वेदानां संहितानां तथैव Mn १३॥

चतुर्थ: स्यादाङ्गिरस: शान्तिकल्पश्च पञ्चम:।

श्रेष्ठास्त्वथर्वणामेते संहितानां विकल्पका:॥ १४॥

I will now give you an account of the
Samhitaés of the Atharvaveda. The illustrious
Muni Sumantu taught this Veda to his pupil
Kabandha, who made it twofold and
communicated the two portions to Devadarsa
and the Pathya. The disciples of Devadarsa
were Maudga, Brahmabali, Saulkayani and
Pippalada. Pathya had three pupils, Jajali,
Kaumudadi and Saunaka; and by all these
were separate branches instituted. Saunaka
having divided his Sarhhita into two, gave one
to Babhru and the other to Saindhavayana; and
from them sprang to schools, the Saindhavas
and Munjakegas.* The principal subjects of
difference in the Sarhhitas of the Atharveda
are the five Kalpas or ceremonials : the Naks
atra kalpa or rules for worshipping thc planets;
the Vaitana Kalpa or rules for oblations,
according to the Vedas generally; the Sarhhita
kalpa rules for sacrifices, according to
different schools; the Angiras Kalpa,
incantations and prayers for the destruction of
foes and the like; and the Santi Kalpa or
prayers for averting evil.°

आख्यानैश्चाप्युपाख्यानैर्गाथाभि: कल्पसिद्धिभि:।

पुराणसंहितां चक्रे पुराणार्थविशारद:।। १५॥

प्रख्यातो व्यासशिष्योऽभूत् सूतो वै रोमहर्षण:।

पुराणसंहितां तस्मै ददौ caret महामुनि:। १६॥

अकृतव्रण: सावर्णि: we शिष्यास्तस्य चाभवन्॥ १७॥

काश्यप: संहिताकर्ता सावर्णि: शांशपायन:।

रौमहर्षणिका चान्या तिसृणां मूलसंहिता:॥ १८॥

चतुष्टयेनाप्येतेन संहितानामिदं मुने!

Accomplished in the purpose of the
Puranas, Vyasa compiled a Pauranik Samhita,
consisting of historical and legendary

traditions, prayers and hymns and _ sacred
chronology.® He had a distinguished disciple,

Sita, also termed Romaharsana and to him the
great Muni communicated the Puranas. Stta
had six scholars, Sumati, Agnivarcas, Mitrayu,
Sarhsapayana, Akrtavrana, who is also called
Kasyapa and Savarni. The three last composed
a fourth, called Romaharsanika. The substance
of which four Sarnhitas is collected into this
(Visnu) Purana.

आद्यं सर्वपुराणानां पुराणं ब्राह्ममुच्यते।। १९॥
अष्टादश पुराणानि पुराणज्ञा: प्रचक्षते।

Wet wat वैष्णवञ्च ves भागवतं त्रथा।। २०॥
अथान्यन्नारदीयञ्च मार्कण्डेयञ्च सप्तमम्।
आग्नेयामष्टमञ्चैव भविष्यं नवमं तथा।। 2 gi
ANTE द्वादशञ्चैव स्कान्दञ्चात्र त्रयोदशम्।। २२॥
मात्स्यञ्च गारुडञ्चैव ब्रह्माण्डञ्च TA: परम्।। २३॥
महापुराणान्येतानि ह्यष्टादश महामुने।

तथा चोपपुराणानि मुनिभि: कथितानि च।। २४॥
सर्गश्च प्रतिसर्गश्च वंशो मन्वन्तराणि ai

waaay कथ्यन्ते वंशानुचरितञ्च A २५॥

The first of all the Puranas is entitled the
Brahma. Those who are acquainted with the
Purdnas enumerate eighteen or the Brahma,
Padma, Vaisnava, Saiva, Bhagavata, Naradiya,
Markandeya, Agenya, Bhavisyat,
Brahmavaivarta, Linga, Varah, Skanda,
Vamana, Korma, Matsya, Garuda, Brahmanda.
The creation of the world and its successive
reproductions, the genealogies of the
patriarchs and kings, the periods of the Manus
and the transactions of the royal dynasties, are
narrated in all these Puranas.

यदेतत् तव मैत्रेय! पुराणं कथ्यते मया।

Uae वैष्णवसंज्ञं वै WAT समनन्तरम्।। २६॥
सर्गे च प्रतिसर्गे च वंशमन्वन्तरादिषु।

कथ्यते भगवान् विष्णुरशेषेष्वेव सत्तम।। २७॥

This Purana which I have repeated to you,
Maitreya, is called the Vaisnava and is next in
the series to the Padma; and in every part of it,
