376

THE VISNU-PURANAM

द्वौ पुत्रावुत्पन्नौ। उशीनरस्यापि शिवि-नृप-नर-कृमिखर्वाख्या:
पञ्च पुत्रा aya: वृषदर्भ-सुवीर-कैकय-मद्रकाश्चत्वार:
शिविपुत्रा:, तितिक्षोरुषद्रथ: पुत्रोऽभूत। ततो हेम: हेमात्
सुतपा:, तस्माद् बलि:, यस्य क्षेत्रे दीर्घतमसा aga
कलिङ्ग-सुह्य-पुण्ड्राख्यं ब्रालेयं क्षत्रमजन्यत।। १॥

तन्नामसन्ततिसंज्ञाश्च पञ्च fara बभूवु:।। २॥

Anu,! the fourth son of Yayati, had three
sons, Sabhdnara, Caksusa and Paramcksu.’
The son of the first was Kalanara;? his son was
Srfijaya; his son was Parafijaya; his son was
Janamejaya; his son was Mahamani; his son
was Mahamanas, who had two sons, Ustnara
and Titiksu. Usinara had five sons, Sivi, Trna,°
Gara,° Krmi, Darvan.’ Sivi had four sons, Vrs
adarbha, Suvira, Kaikeya and Madra.* Titiksu
had one son, Usadratha;” his son was Hema;'®
his son was Sutapas; his son was Bali, on
whose wife five sons were begotten by
Dirghatamas or Anga, Banga, Kalinga, Suhma
and Pundra;'' and their descendants and the
five countries they inhabited, were known by
the same names.”

अङ्गसुत: um: ad दिविरथ:, wang धर्मरथ:),
ततश्चित्ररथ:। रोमपादसंज्ञो यस्य पुत्रो दशरथो ag यस्मै
Fara ३॥

रोमपादाच्च तुरङ्ग: तस्माच्च पृथुलाक्ष: ततश्चम्प: । यश्चम्पां
निवेशच्छुमोस।। ४॥

चप्पस्य: हर्यङ्ग:) ततो भद्ररथो बृहद्रथो बृहत्कर्मा च।
बृहतकर्मणंश्च बृहद्धानु:, तस्माद् बृहन्मना:, Tat जयद्रय:,
जयद्रथस्तु ब्रह्मक्षत्रान्तरालसम्भूत्यां wut fart am
पुत्रमजीजनत्॥ &

farmer git पुत्रमवाप!। ततस्यापि वृतव्रत: पुत्रोऽभूत्।
gaan सत्यकर्मा, सत्यकर्मणस्त्वधिरथ:। योऽसौ agi
गतो मञ्जूषागतं पृथापविद्धं कर्णं Gare ६॥

BUTE वृषसेन इत्येते अङ्गा:॥७॥

अतश्चपुरोर्वंशं श्रीतुमर्हसीति।। ८॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे अष्टादश: अध्याय:।।

The son of Anga was Para;'* his son was
Divaratha; his son was Dharmaratha;'* his son

was Citraratha; his son was Romapada,'* also
called Dasgaratha, to whom, being childless,
DaSaratha, the son of Aja, gave his daughter
Santa to be adopted.’ After this, Romapdda
had a son named Caturanga; his son was
Prthulaksa; his son was Campa, who founded
the city of Campa." The son of Campa was
Haryyanga; his son was Bhadraratha, who had
two sons, Vrhatkarman and Vrhadratha. The
son of the first was Vrhadbhanu;'* his son was
Vrihanmanas; his son was Jayadratha, who, by
a wife who was the daughter of a Ksatriya
father and Brahmant mother, had a son named
Vijaya,’ his son was Dhrti; his son was
Dhrtavrata; his son was Satyakarman; his son
was Adhiratha?® who found Karna in a basket
on the banks of the Ganges, where he had been
exposed by his mother, Prtha. The son of
Karna was Vrsasena.”! These were the Anga
kings. You shall next hear who were the
descendants of Puru.

NOTES

1. By some unaccountable caprice the Brahma
Purana and Hari Varnsa, unsupported by any other
authority, here substitute for Anu the name of Kaks
eyu, a descendant of Puru and transfer the whole
serics of his posterity to the house of Puru.

2. Paksa and Parapaksa : Vayu. Paramesu ;
Matsya. Paroksa : Bhagavata.

3. Kalanala 4V4yu. Kolahala ` Matsya.

4, Mahasala : Agni. MahAsila : Bhagavata.

5. Nrga: Agni. Vana: Bhagavata.

6. Nava : Matsya. Sama ; Bhagavata.

7. Vrata : Agni. Suvrata : Matsya. Daksa :
Bhagavata. According to the Brahma Purana and
Hari Varhsa the five sons of UsiInara were the
ancestors of different tribes. Sivi was the progenitor
of the Saivas; Nrga of the Yaudheyas; Nava of the
Navar4stras; Vrata of the Ambasthas; and Krmi
founded the city Krmila.

8. Bhadra and Bhadraka : Matsya, Agni. These
sons of Sivi give name to different provinces and
tribes in the west and north-west of India.

9. Rusadratha : Agni. Tusadratha : Matsya.

10. Phena: Agni. Sena ; Matsya.

11. Odra or in some copies Andhra : Bhagavata.
