110

येमेदृशान्यसाधूनि वदत्याविष्टमानस:। २५॥
प्रह्लाद उवाच
न केवलं मद्हृदयं स विष्णु-
राक्रम्य लोकान् सकलानवस्थित:।
स मां त्वदादींश्च पित:! समस्तान्
समस्तचेष्टासु युनक्ति WAT २६॥
Hiranyakasipu then exclaimed, "What evil
spirit has entered into the breast of this silly
boy, that thus, like one possessed, be utters
such profanity?" "Not into my heart alone,"
said Prahlada, "has Visnu entered, but he
prevadas all the regions of the universe, and

by his omnipresence influences the conduct of
all beings, mine, father, and thine."

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

निष्काम्यतामयं दुष्ट: शास्यताञ्च गुरोर्गृहे।

योजितो दुर्मति: केन विपक्षवितथस्तुतो।। २७॥

Away with the wretch." cried the king;
"take him to hit preceptor's mansion. By

whom could he have becn instigated to repeat
the lying praises of my foe.'

पराशर उवाच
जग्राह विद्यामनिशं गुरुशुश्रूषणोद्यत:॥ २८॥
कालेऽत्तीते च महति प्रह्लादमसुरेवर:।
समाहूयात्रवीत् पुत्र! गाथा काचित् प्रगीयताम्॥ २९॥

According to the commands of his father.
Prahlada was conducted by the Daityas back to
the house of his Guru; where, assiduous in
attendance on his preceptor, he constantly
improved in wisdom. After a considerable
time had elapsed, the sovereign of the Asuras
scnt for him again; and on his arrival in his
presence, desired him to recite some poetical
composition. Prahlada immediately began.

Welq Sara

यत: प्रधानपुरुषौ यतश्चैतच्चराचरम्।
कारणं सकलस्यास्य स नो विष्णु: प्रसीदतु॥ ३ ०॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

May he from whom matter and soul
originate, from whom all that moves or is
unconscious proceeds, he who is the cause of
all this creation, Visnu, be favourable unto us.

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

दुरात्मा बध्यतामेष नानेनार्थोऽस्ति जीवता।

स्वपक्षहानिकर्त्तत्वाद् A: कुलाङ्गारतां गत:।॥ ३ Vl
पराशर उवाच।

इत्याज्ञप्तास्ततस्तेन प्रगृहीतमहायुधा:।
उद्यतास्तस्य नाशाय दैत्या: शतसहस्रश:॥ ३ २॥

On hearing which.  Hiranyakasipu
exclaimed, "Kill the wretch; he is not fit to
live, who is a traitor to his friends, a burning
brand to his own race:" and his attendants,
obedient to his orders, snatched up their
weapons, and rushed in crowds upon Prahlada,
to destroy him.

Were उवाच
दैतेयास्तेन सत्येन मा क्रामन्त्वायुधानि मे।। ३ 3
पराशर उवाच
नावाप वेदनामल्पामभूच्चैव TAT! ३४॥

The prince calmly looked upon them and
said, "Daityas, as truly as Visnu is present in
your weapons and in my body, so truly shall
those weapons fail to harm me:" and
accordingly, although struck heavily and
repeatedly by hundreds of the Daityas, the
prince felt not the least pain, and his strength
was ever renewed.

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
दुर्बुद्धे!विनिबर्त्त’स्त्रवैरिंपक्षस्तबादत:।
अभयं ते प्रयच्छामि मातिमूढमतिर्भव।। ३५॥
Waele उवाच
wa भयानामपहारिणि स्थिते
मनस्यनन्ते मम कुत्र तिष्ठति।
यस्मिन् स्मृते जन्मजरान्तकादि-
भयानि सर्वाण्यपयान्ति तात।। ३६॥
