316

THE VISNU-PURANAM

between Vasistha and Visvamitra, metamorphosed
into birds, according to the Bhagavata; but that
work assigns it to a different period or the reign of
Hariscandra. If the tradition have any import, it
may refer to the ensigns of the contending parties;
for banners, with armorial devices, were, as we
learn from the Mahabharata, invariably borne by
princes and leaders.

12. The Bhagavata adds, that he captured the city
of the Asuras, situated in the west; when his name
Parafijaya, ‘victor of the city:' he is also termed
Paranjaya, 'vanquisher of foes;' he is also called
Indravaha, 'borne by Indra’.

13. Suyodhana : Matsya, Agni, Kirma.

14. Visvaka : Linga, Visvagandhi; Bhagavata
Vistarasva; Brahma Purana and Hari Varhéa.

15. Andhra; Vayu, Ayu; Agni, Candra;
Bhagavata.

16, Savasta and Savasti : Bhagavata, Sravasti;
Matsya, Linga and Kirma, which also say that
Sravasti was in the country of Gaura, which is
Eastern Bengal; but it is more usually placed in
Kosala by which a part of Avadha is commonly
understood. In my Dictionary I have inserted
Sravanti, upon the authority of the Trikanda Sesa,
but it is no doubt an error for Sravasti; it is there
also called Dharmapattana, being a city of some
sanctity in the estimation of the Buddhists. It is
termed by Fa-Hian, She-wei; by Hwan Tsang, She-
lo-va-si-ti; and placed by both nearly in the site of
Faizabad in Avadha. Account of the Foe-kue-ki.

17. This legend is told in much more detail in the
Vayu and Brahma Puranas. Dhundhu hid himself
beneath a sea of sand, which Kuvalyasva and his
sons dug up, undeterred by the flames which
checked their progress and finally destroyed most
of them. The legend originates probably in the
occurrence of some physical phenomenon, as an
earthquake or volcano.

18. The series of names agrees very well to
Sanhatasva, called Varhnasva in the Bhagavata. We
have there some variations and some details not
noticed in our text. The Vayu, Brahma, Agni,
Linga, Matsya and Kirma, ascribe two sons to
Sanhatasva, whom the two first name Krisaégva and
Akrisasva and the rest Krisésva and Randasva.
Senajit or Prasenjit is generally, though not always,
termed the son of the younger brother; but the
commentator on the Hari Varga calls him the son

of Sanhatagva, while the Matsya, Agni, Linga and
Karma omit him and make Mandhatri the son of
Ranasva. The mother of Prasenjit and the wife of
Akrsagva or Sanhatasva, according to the different
interpretations, was the daughter of Himavat,
known as Drsadvati, the river so termed (Bk. II. Ch.
III. n. 7). The wife of Yuvanasva, according to the
Vapu or of Prasenajit, according to the Brahma,
was Gauri, the daughter of Rantinara, who
incurring the imprecation of her husband, became
the Bahuda river (Bk. II. Ch. III. n. 6). The Brahma
and Hari Varhsa call Yuvanasva her son; but in
another place the Hari Varnsa contradicts itself,
calling Gauri the daughter of Matimara, of the race
of Puru, the mother of Mandhatri; here following
apparently the Matsya, in which it is so stated. The
Brahma Purana is not guilty of the inconsistency.
The Vayu of course gives the title to Mandhitri,
with the addition that he was called Gaurika, after
his mother ; तस्यास्तु गौरिक: aswadt बभूव ह। मान्धाता
`यौवनाश्वो a त्रैलोक्यविजयी नृप:॥ Mandhatri's birth from
Gauri is the more remarkable, as it is incompatible
with the usual Jegend given in our text and in the
Bhagavata, which seems therefore to have been of
subsequent origin, suggested by the etymology of
the name. In the Bhagavata, Mandhiatri is also
named Trasadasyu or the terrifier or thieves.

19. The Vayu cites this same verse and another,
with the remark, that they were uttered by those
acquainted with the Puranas and with genealogies :

पौराणिका द्विजा:। यावत्सूर्य्यस्य उदयो
यावदरस्तमनं भवेत्। सर्व्व-तद्यौवनाश्वस्य मान्धातु: क्षेत्रमुच्यते।।
अत्राप्युदाहरन्तीमं with वंशविदो wa यौवनाश्वं महात्मानं
राजानममितौजसं। मान्धातारं तनुं विष्णो: पुराणज्ञा: प्रचक्षते॥

20. The Brahma and Agni omit Ambarisa, for
whom the Matsya substitutes Dharmasena. The
following legend of Saubhari occurs elsewhere
only in the Bhagavata and there less in detail.

21. The great Nidhi : a Nidhi is a treasure, of
which there are several belonging to Kubera; each
has its guardian spirit or is personified.

22. Of Mamata, 'mineness' (ममता); the notion that
wives, children, wealth, belong to an individual and
are essential to his happiness.

KR*
