३42

THE VISNU-PURANAM

successively commanded by his father to put his
mother to death; but amazed and influenced by
natural affection, neither of them made any reply :
therefore Jamadagni was angry and cursed them
and they became as idiots and lost all understanding
and were like unto beasts or birds. Lastly, Rama
returned to the hermitage, when the mighty and
holy Jamadagni said unto him, "Kill your mother,
who has sinned; and do it, son, without repining."
Rama accordingly took up his axe and struck off
his mother's head; whereupon the wrath of the
illustrious and mighty Jamadagni was assuaged and
he was pleased with his son and said, "Since you
have obeyed my commands and done what was
hard to be performed, demand from me whatever
blessings your will and your desires shall be all
fulfilled.' Then Rama begged of his father these
boons; the restoration of his mother to life, with
forgetfulness of her having been slain and
purification from all defilement; the return of his
brothers to their natural condition and for himself,
invincibility in single combat and length of days;
and all these did his father bestow.

"It happened on one occasion, that, during the
absence of the Rsi's sons, the mighty monarch
Karttavirya, the sovereign of the Haihaya tribe,
endowcd by the favour of Dattdtreya with a
thousand arms and a golden chariot that went
wheresoever he willed it to go, came to the
hermitage’® of Jamadagni, where the wife of the
sage received him with all proper respect. The king,
inflated with the pride of valour, made no return to
her hospitality, but carried off with him by violence
the calf of the milch cow of the sacred obation!”
and cast down the tall trees surrounding the
hermitage. When R4ma returned, his father told
him what had chanced and he saw the cow in
affliction and he was filled with wrath. Taking up
his splendid bow,'* Bhargava, the slayer of hostile
heroes, assailed K&rttavirya, who had now become
subject to the power of death and overthrew him in
battle. With sharp arrows Rama cut off iis
thousand arms and the king perished. The sons of
Karttavirya, to revenge his death, attacked the
hermitage of Jamadagni, when Rama was away and
slew the pious and unresisting sage, who called
repeatedly, but fruitlessly, upon his valiant son.
They then departed; and when Rama returned,
bearing fuel from the thickets, he found his father
lifeless and thus bewailed his unmerited fate ;
‘Father, in resentment of my actions have you been

murdered by wretches as foolish as they are base!
By the sons of Karttavirya are you struck down, as
a deer in the forest by the huntsman's shafts! Ill
have deserved such a death; you who have ever
trodden the path of virtue and never offered wrong
to any created thing! How great is the crime that
they have committed, in slaying with their deadly
shafts an old man like you, wholly occupied with
pious cares and engaging not in strife! Much have
they to boast of to their fellows and the friends,
they have shamelessly slain a solitary hermit,
incapable of contending in arms?’ Thus lamenting,
bitterly and repeatedly, Rama performed his father's
last obsequies and lighted his funeral pile. He then
made a vow that he would extirpate the whole Ks
atriya race. In fulfilment of this purpose he took up
his arms and with remorseless and fatal rage singly
destroyed in fight the sons of K4rttavirya; and after
them, whatever Ksatriyas he encountered, Rama,
the first of warriors, likewise slew. Thrice seven
times did he clear the earth of the Ksatriya caste;!*
and he filled with their blood the five large lakes of
Samanta-paficaka, from which he offered libations
to the race of Bhrgu. There did he behold his sire
again and the son of Rcika beheld his son and told
him what to do. Offering a solemn sacrifice to the
king of the gods, Jamadagnya presented the earth to
the ministering priests. To Kagyapa he gave the
altar made of gold, ten fathoms in length and nine,
in height.” With the permission of Kasyapa, the
Brahmanas divided it in picces amongst them and
they were then called Khandavayana Braéhmanas.
Having given the earth to Kasyapa, the hero of
immeasurable prowess retired to the Mahendra
mountain, where he still resides : and in this
manner was there enmity between him and the race
of Ksitryas and thus was the whole earth conquered
by Rama."”!

The son of Vigvamitra was Sunahgephas, the
descendant of Bhrgu, given by the gods and then
named Devarata.?* Vigvamitra had other sons also,
amongst whom the most celebrated were
Madhuchandas, Krtajaya, Devadeva, Astaka,
Kacchapa and Hirita; these founded many families,
all of whom were known by the name of Kausikas
and intermarried with the families of various Rsis.”

NOTES

1. Considerable variety prevails in these names
and the Matsya, Padma, Brahma and Agni
enumerate eight. The lists are as follows :
