BOOK V, CHAP. 21

475

उवाच arg! भोस्तात।! चिराढुत्कण्ठितेन मे।
भवन्तौ कंसभीतेन दृष्टो सङ्कर्षणेन च।। २॥
कुर्वतां याति य: कालो मातापित्रोरपूजनम्।
तत्खण्डमायुषो व्यर्थमसाधूनां हि जायते।। ३॥
गुरु-देव-द्विजातीनां मातापित्रोश्च पूजनम्।
कुर्वतां सफलं जन्म देहिनां तात! जायते।॥४॥
तत् क्षन्तव्यमिदं सर्वमतिक्रमकृतं पित:।
कंसप्रतापवीर्याभ्यामार्त्तयो: परवश्ययो:।। ५॥

Having permitted to Devaki and Vasudeva
an interval of true knowledge, through the
contemplation of his actions, Hari again
spread the delusions of his power over them
and the tribe of Yadu. He said to them,
“Mother; venerable father; you have both been
long observed by Sankarsana and myself with
sorrow, and in fear of Kansa. He whose time
passes not in respect to his father and mother,
is a vile being, who descends in vain from
virtuous parents. The lives of those produce
good fruit, who reverence their parents, their
spiritual guides, the Brahmanas, and the gods.
Pardon therefore, father, the impropriety of
which we may have been culpable, in
resenting without your orders, to which we
acknowledge that we are subject, the
oppression we suffered from the power and
violence of Kansa.”

इत्युक्त्वाथ प्रणम्योभौ यदुवृद्धाननुक्रमात्।
यथावदभिपूज्याथ चक्रतु: पौर-माननम्।॥ ६॥
विलेपुर्मातरश्चास्य दु:खशोकपरिप्लुता:॥ ७॥
बहुप्रकारमत्यर्थं पश्चात्तापातुरो ete: |

ता: समाश्वासयामास स्वयमस्राविलेक्षण:॥ ८॥
उग्रसेनं ततो बन्धान्मुमोच मधुसूदन:।

safes तथैवैनं निजराज्ये हतात्मजम्॥ ९॥
चकार प्रेतकार्याणि ये चान्ये तत्र घातिता:।। १०॥

उवाचाज्ञापय fait! यत् कार्यमविशङ्कित:।। ११॥
ययातिशापाद् वंशोऽयमराज्यार्होऽपि साम्प्रतम्।

मयि yet स्थिते देवानाज्ञापयतु fe नृपै:।। १२॥

Thus speaking, they offered homage to the
elders of the Yadu tribe in order, and then in a
suitable manner paid their respects to the
citizens. The wives of Kansa, and those of his
father, then surrounded the body to the king,
lying on the ground, and bewailed his fate in
deep affliction, Hari in various ways expressed
his regret for what had chanced, and
endeavoured to console them, his own eyes
being suffused with tears. The foe of Madhu
then liberated Ugrasena from confinement,
and placed him on the throne, which the death
of his son had left vacant. The chief of the
Yadavas, being crowned, performed the
funeral rites of Kansa, and of the rest of the
slain. When the ceremony was over, and
Ugrasena had resumed his royal seat, Krsna
addressed him, and said, “Sovereign lord,
command boldly what clse is to be done. The
curse of Yayati has pronounced our race
unworthy of dominion:’ but with me, for your
servant, you may issue your orders to the gods.
How should kings disobey them? `

पराशर Jara

इत्युक्त्वा सोऽस्मरद् वायुमाजगाम A तत्क्षणात्।

उवाच चैनं भगवान् केशव: कार्यमानुष:। १३॥

गच्छेन्द्र ब्रूहि वायो! त्वमलं गर्वेण वासव।

दीयतामुग्रसेनाय सुधर्मा भवता सभा।। १४॥

PO ब्रवीति राजार्हमेतद्रत्नमनुत्तमम्।

सुधर्माख्या सभा युक्तमस्या यदुभिरासितुम्॥ १५॥

Thus having spoken, the human KeSava
summoned mentally the deity of the wind,
who came upon the instant, and said to him,
“Go, Vayu, to Indra, and desire him to lay
aside his pomp, and resign to Ugrasena his
splendid hall Sudharman: tell him that Krsna
commands him to send the royal hall, the
unrivalled gem of princely courts, for the
assemblage of the race of Yadu.”
