424

ventured into the conflict, quickly retreat from
the field, receiving my shafts upon his back,
not bravely upon his breast ? When in
resentment he withheld the fertilising showers
from my kingdom, did not my arrows compel
the clouds to part with their waters, as much as
were required? Are not all the monarchs of the
earth in terror of my prowess and subject to
my orders, save only Jarasandha my sire?!
Now, chiefs of the Daitya race, it is my
determination to inflict still deeper
degradation upon these evil-iminded and
unprincipled gods. Let therefore every man
who is notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods
and Brahmanas), every man who is remarkable
for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to
death, that thus the gods shall be deprived of
the means by which they subsist. Thc goddess
who has been born as the infant child of
Devaki has announced to me that he is again
alive who in a former being was my death. Let
therefore active search be made for whatever
young children there may be upon earth and
let every boy in whom there are signs of
unusual vigour be slain without remorse.”

पराशर उवाच
इत्याज्ञाप्यासुरान् कंस: प्रविष्यात्मगृहं तत:।
मुमोच वसुदेवञ्च देवकीञ्च निरोधत:॥ १४॥

Having issued these commands, Karhsa
retired into his palace and liberated Vasudeva
and Devaki from their captivity.

wa sara

युवयोर्घातिता wat वृथैवैते मयाधुना।

कोऽप्यन्य एव नाशाय बालो मम समुद्गत:।। १५॥

तदलं षरितापेन नूनं तद्भाविनो हि ते।

अर्भका युवयोर्दोषाचायुषो यद्वियोजिता:।। १६॥

इत्याश्वास्य विमुक्त्वा च कंसस्तौ परिशङ्कित:।

अन्तर्गृहं द्विजश्रेष्ठ प्रविवेश पुन: स्वकम्।। १७॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे चतुर्थ: अध्याय:॥
“*It is in vain,’’ said he to them, ‘‘that I

have slain all your children, since after all he

THE VISNU-PURANAM

who is destined to kill me has escaped. It is of
no use to regret the past. The children you may
hereafter have may enjoy life unto its natural
close; no one shall cut it short." Having thus
conciliated them, Karhsa, alarmed for himself,
withdrew into the interior apartments of his
palace.

NOTES
1. Jarasandha, prince of Magadha, was the

father-in-law of Karhnsa.
KRREK
