462

श्रीवत् सवक्षसञ्जारुकेयूरमुकुटोज्ज्वलम्।

ददर्श कृष्णमक्किष्ट-पुण्डरीकावतंसकम्॥ ४ १॥
सनन्दनाद्यैर्मुनिभि: सिद्धियोगैरकल्मषै:।
विचिन्त्यात्मानं तत्रस्थैर्नासाग्रन्यस्तलोचनै:॥ ४ २॥

Thus lamented by the women, KeSava and
Rama quitted the district of Vraja.' Travelling
in a car drawn by fleet horses, they arrived at
noon at the banks of the Yamuna, when
Akrira requested them to halt a little, whilst
he performed the usual daily ceremonial in the
river? Accordingly the intelligent Akrora
bathed, and rinsed his mouth, and then
entering the stream, he stood meditating upon
the supreme being; but he beheld mentally’
Balabhadra, having thousand hooded heads, a
garland of Jasmine flowers, and large red eyes,
attended by Vasuki. Rambha and other mighty
serpents, praised by the Gandharvas decorated
with wild flowers, wearing dark coloured
garments, crowned with a chaplet of lotuses,
ornamented with brilliant earrings, Inebriate,
and standing at the bottom of the river in the
water.’ On his lap he also beheld, at his ease,
Krsna. of the complexion of a cloud,° with full
and coppery eyes, having an elegant form, and
four hands, armed with the discus and other
weapons, wearing yellow clothes, decorated
with many coloured flowers, and appearing
like a cloud embellished with streams of
lightning and the bow of Indra; his breast was
marked with the celestial sign, his arms were
radiant with bracelets, a diadem shone on his
brow, and he wore a white lotus for his crest:
he was attended by Sanandana and other holy
sages, who, fixing then eyes upon the tips of

their noses, were absorbed in profound
meditation.
बल-कृष्णौ तथाक्रूर: प्रत्यभिज्ञाय विस्मित:।

सोऽचिन्तयद् रथाच्छीघ्रं कथमत्रागताविति।। ४३॥
विवक्षो: स्तम्भयामास वाचं तस्य जनार्द्दन:।

ततो निष्क्रम्य सलिलादू रथमभ्यागत: पुन:।।४४॥
ददर्श तत्र चैवाभौ रथस्योपर्य्यधिष्ठितौ।

राम-कृष्णौ यथापूर्वं मनुष्यवपुषान्वितौ॥४५॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

निमग्नश्च ततस्तोये स ददर्श तथैव तौ।
संस्तूयमानौ गन्धर्व-मुनि-सिद्ध-महोरगै:।। ४६॥
ततो विज्ञातसद्भाव: स तु दानपतिस्तथा।
तुष्टाव सर्वविज्ञानमयमच्युतमीश्वरम्।।४७॥

When Akrira beheld Balarama and Krsna
in this situation, he was much amazed, and
wondered how they could so quickly have got
there from the chariot. He wished to ask them
this, but Janarddana deprived him of the
faculty of speech at the moment. Ascending
then from the water, he repaired to the car, and
there he found them both quietly seated in the
same human persons as before. Plunging again
into the water, there he again beheld them,
hymned as before by the Gandharvas, saints,
sages, and serpents. Apprehending, therefore,
their real character, he thus eulogized the
eternal deity, who consists of true knowledge :

सन्मात्ररूपिणेऽचिन्त्यमहिम्ने परमात्मने।
व्यापिने नैकरूपैकस्वरूपाय नमो नम:।॥४८॥
सत्त्वरूपाय तेऽचिन्त्य! हविर्भूताय ते नम:।
नमोऽविज्ञातपाराय पराय Wat: प्रभो।।४९॥
भूतात्मा चेन्द्रियात्मा प्रधानात्मा तथा भवान्।
आत्मा च परामात्मा च त्वमेक:पञ्चधा स्थित:।।५०॥
प्रसीद सर्वं सर्वात्मन् क्षराक्षरमयेश्वर।
ब्रह्म-विष्णु-शिवाद्याभि: कल्पनाभिरुदीरित:॥ ५ १॥
अनाख्येयस्वरूपात्मन्! अनाख्येयप्रयोजन।
अनाख्येयाभिधानं त्वां नतोऽस्मि परमेश्वर॥ ५ २॥
न यत्र नाथ। विद्यन्ते नामजात्यादिकल्पना:।
तद् ब्रह्मा परमं नित्यमविकारि भवानज:॥५३॥
न कल्पनामृतेऽर्थस्य सर्वस्याधिगमो यत:।
तत: कृष्णाच्युतानन्तविष्णुसंज्ञाभिरीड्यसे॥ ५४॥
सर्वार्थस्त्वमज! विकल्पनाभिरेद्
देवाद्यं जगद्खिलं त्वमेव विश्वम्।
सर्वस्मिन् न fe भवतोऽस्ति किञ्चिदन्यत्॥ ५ ५॥
त्वं gan पशुपतिरर्य्यमा विधाता
धाता त्वं त्रिदशपति: समीरणोऽग्नि:।
