BOOK I, CHAP. 14

91

worship that Purusottama, the god who is pure
spirit, and who, without qualities, is ignorantly
Brahma, the ultimate condition of Visnu,
unporductive, unborn, pure void of qualities,
and free from accidents.

अदीर्घह्रस्वमस्थूलमनण्वग्र्यमलोहितम्।
अस्मैहच्छायपनणुमसक्तपशरोरिणम्॥ट्टुश।
अनाकाशमसंस्पर्शमगन्धमरसञ्च यत्।

अचक्षु: श्रोत्रमचलमवाक्प्राणममानसम्।। ४०॥
अनामगोत्रममुखमतेजस्कमहेतुकम्।

अभ्यं ॥४१॥

अरजोऽशब्दममृतमप्लुतं यदसंवृतम्।

पूर्वापरे न वै यस्मिन् ag विष्णो: परमं TEA yl

परमीशित्वगुणवत् सर्वभूतमसंश्रयम्।

नता: स्म तत् Us विष्णोर्जिह्वादृग्गोचरं न यत्।।४३॥

Who is neither high nor low, neither bulky
nor minute, has neither shape, nor colour, nor
shadow, nor substance; nor affection, nor
body; who is neither etherial nor suscepible of
cantact, smell, or taste; who has neither eyes,
nor ears, nor motion, nor speech, nor breath,
nor mind, nor name; nor considered as
endowed with qualities. We adore the supreme
race, nor enjoyment, nor splendour; who is
without cause, without fear, without error,
without fault, undecaying, immortal, free from
passion, without sound, imperceptible,
inactive, independent of place or time,
detached from all investing properites; but
(illusively) exercising irresistible might, and
indentified with all beings, dependent upon
none. Glory to the nature of Visnu which
tongue can not tell, nor has eye behelf.”

पराशर उवाच
एवं प्रचेतसो विष्णुं स्तुवन्तस्तत्समाधय:।
दशवर्षसहस्राणि तपश्चेरुर्महार्णवे॥४४॥
Wa: Weal भगवांस्तेषामन्तर्जले Bits
ददौ दर्शनमुन्निद्रनीलोत्पलदलच्छवि:।। ४५॥
पतत्रिराजमारूढमवलोक्य प्रचेतस:।
प्राणिपेतु: शिरोभिस्तं भक्तिभारावनामितै:।। ४६॥
ततस्तानाह भगवान् व्रियतामीप्सतो वर:।

प्रसादसुमुखोऽहं वो वरद: समुपस्थित:।।४७॥

ततस्तमूचुर्वरदं प्रणिपत्य प्रचेतस:।

यथा पित्रा समादिष्टं प्रजानां वृद्धिकारणम्॥४८॥

स चापि देवस्तं दत्त्वा यथाभिलषितं वरम्।

अन्तरद्धानं जगामाशु ते च निश्चक्रमुर्जलात्॥४९॥

इति श्रीविष्णुषुराणे प्रथमेऽंशे चतुर्दंशोऽध्याय:।

ParaSara said— Thus glorfying Visnu and
intent in mediation of him, the Pracetasas
passed ten thousand years of austerity in the
vast ocean; on which Hari, being pleased with
them, appeared to them amidst the waters, of
the complexion of the full-blown lotus leaf.
Beholding him mounted on the king of birds,
Gartda, the Pracetasas blowed down their
heads in devout homage; when Visnu said to
them, “Receive the boon you have desired; for
I the giver of good, am content with you, and
am present.” The Pracetasas replied to him
with reverence, and told him that the cause of
their devotions was the command of their
father to effect the multiplication of mankind.
The god, having accordingly granted to them
the object of their prayers, disappered, and
they came up from the water.

KEK

NOTES

1. The text of the Vayu and Brahma (or Hari
Varhéa) read. like that of the Visnu, Jet: Jat
जज्ञातेऽन्तर्दिपालिनौ। Mons. Langlois understands the
two last words as compound epithet: “Se jouirent
du pouvoir de se recdre invisibles.” The
construction would admit of such a sense, but it
seems more probable that they are intended for
names. The lineage of Prthu is immediately
continued through one of them, Antarddhana,
which is the same as Antarddhi; as the
commentator states with regard to that appellation,
arargtardsi: | and as the commentator on the Hari
VarhSa remarks of the succeeding name
SATSMIeTMSAML! ‘one of the brothers being called
Antarddhana or Antarddhi.' leaves no other sense
for Palin but that of a proper name. The Bhagavata
gives Prthu five sons, Vijitaégva, Haryyaksa.
Dhiimrd-kega. Vrka, and Dravina. and adds that the
elder was also named Antarddh4na, in consequence
