BOOK I, CHAP. 18

"You have been born prince, in the family
of Brahma, celebrated in the three worlds, the
son of Hiranyakasipu, the king of the Daityas;
why should you acknowledge dependance
upon the gods? why upon the eternal? Your
father is the stay of all worlds, as you they self
in turn shall be. Desist, then, from celebrating
the praises of an enemy; and remember, that of
all venerable preceptors, a father is most
venerable. ।

Tele Sart

एवमेतन्महाभागा:! श्लाघ्यमेतन्महाकुलम्।

मरीचे: सकलेऽप्यस्मिन् त्रैलोक्ये कोऽन्यथा वदेत्।। १४॥

पिता च मम सर्वस्मिन् जगत्युत्कृष्टचेष्टित:।

एतदप्यवगच्छामि सत्यमत्रापि नानृतम्।। १५॥

गुरुणामपि सर्वेषां पिता परमको गुरु:।

यदुक्तं भ्रान्तिरत्रापि स्वल्पापि fe न विद्यते॥ १६॥

पिता गुरुर्न सन्देह: पूजनीय: प्रयत्नत:।

तत्रापि नापराध्यामीत्येवं मनसि मे स्थितम्।। १७॥

को ब्रवीति यथायुक्तं fag नैतद् वचोऽर्थवत्।। १८॥

Prahlada replied to them, “Illusctious
Brahmanas, it is true that the Family of Marici
is renowned in the three worlds; this cannot be
denied: and I also admit, what is equally
indisputable, that my father is mighty over the
universe. There is no error, not the least, in
what you have said, ‘that a father is the most
venerable of all holy teachers:' he is a vene-
rable instructor, no doubt, and is ever to be
devoutly reverenced. To all these things I have
nothing to object, they find a rcady assent in
my mind: but when you say, 'Why should I
depend upon the eternal?’ who can give assent
to this as right ? the words are void of
meaning."

इत्युक्त्वा सोऽभवन्मौनी तेषां गौरवयन्रित:।

प्रहस्य च पुन: प्राह किमनन्तेन साध्विति।। १९॥

साधु भो: किमनन्तेन साधु भो गुरवो मम।

श्रूयतां यदनन्तेन यदि खेदं न यास्यथ।। oll

धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाख्या: पुरुषार्था उदाहृता:।

117

चतुष्टयमिदं यस्मात् तस्मात् किं किमिदं वृथा।। २१॥
मरीचिमिश्रैर्दक्षेण तथैवान्यैरनन्तत:।

ad: प्राप्तस्तथैवान्यैरर्थ: कामस्तथापरै:॥ २२॥
तत्तत्त्ववेदिनो भूत्त्वा ज्ञानध्यानसमाधिभि:।
अवापुर्मुक्तिमपरे पुरुषा ध्वस्तबन्धना:।। २३॥
सम्पदैश्चर्यमाहात्म्यज्ञानसन्ततिकर्मणाम्।
विमुक्तेश्चैकतालभ्यं मूलमाराधनं BT २४॥

यतो धर्मार्थकामाख्यं मुक्तिश्चापि wet द्विजा:।
तेनापि हि किमेत्येवमनन्तेन किमुच्यते।। २५॥

किञ्चात्र बहुनोक्तेन भवन्तो गुरवो मम।
वदन्तु साधु वाऽसाधु विवेकोऽस्माकमल्पक:।। २ ६॥

Having said thus much, he was silent
awhile, being restrained by respect to their
sacred functions; but he was unable to repress
his smiles, and again said, "What need is there
of the eternal? admirable! most worthy of you
who are my venerable preceptors. Hear what
need there is of the eternal. If to hearken will
not give you pain. The fourfold objects of men
are said to be virtue, desire, wealth, final
emancipation. Is he who is the source of all
these of no avail ? Virtue was derived from
the eternal by Daksa, Marichi, and other
patriarchs; wealth has been obtained from him
by others; and by others, the enjoyment of
their desires: whilst those who. through true
wisdom and holy contemplation, have come to
know his essence, have been released from
their bondage, and have attained freedom from
existence for ever. The glorification of Hari,
attainable by unity, is the root of all riches,
dignity, renown, wisdom, progeny.
righteousness, and liberation. Virtue, wealth,
desire, and even final freedom, Brahmans, are
fruits bestowed by him. How then can it be
said, 'What need is there of the eternal ? But
enough of this: what occasion is there to say
more? You are my venerable preceptors, and
speak you good or evil, it is not for my weak
judgment to decide."

पुरोहिता wy:
दह्यमानस्त्वमस्माभिरग्निना बाल रक्षित:।
