३46

THE VISNU-PURANAM

The son of Alarka was Santati;' his son
was Sunitha; his son was Suketu; his son was
Dharmaketu; his son was Satyaketu; his son
was Vibhu; his son was Suvibhu; his son was
Sukuméara; his son was Dhrstketu; his son was
Vainahotra; his son was Bharga; his son was
Bhargabhtimi; from whom also rules for the
four castes were promulgated.'* These are the
Kasya princes or descendants of Kaga.'7 We
will now enumerate the descendants of Raji.

REE

NOTES

1. Dharmavrddha Vayu. Vrddhasgarman
Matsya. Yajfiagarman : Padma.

2. Darbha : Agni. Dambha : Padma.

3. Vipapman : Agni and Matsya, Vidaman ;
Padma. The two last authorities proceed no further
with this line.

4. Sunahotra : Vayu, Brahma.

5. Kasya : Bhagavata.

6. Sala : Vayu, Brahma, Hari Varhsa : whose son
was Arstisena, father of Caranta; Vayu : of
Kasyapa; Brahma and Hari Varnga.

7. Here is probably an error, for the Vayu,
Bhagavata and Brahma agree in making Sunaka the
son of Ghrtsamada and father of Saunaka.

8. The expression is चातुर्बर्ण्य प्रवर्त्तयिता। 'The
originator or causer of the distinctions (or duties) of
the four castes." The commentator, however,
understands the expression to signify, that his
descendants were nn the four castes. So also the

Vayu : च शुनकौ यस्य शौनक:। ब्राह्मणा
क्षत्रियाश्चैव शूद्रास्तथैवचा एतस्य वंशेसमुद्गूता: विचित्रै
कर्म्मभिर्दविजा:॥ ` son of Ghrtsamda was Sunaka,

whose son was Saunaka, Brahmanas, Ksatriya,
Vaigyas and Siidras were born in his race;
Brahmanas by distinguished deeds.' The existence
of but one caste in the age of purity, however
incompatible with the legend which ascribes the
origin of the four tribes to Brahma, is everywhere
admitted. Their separation is assigned to different
individuals, whether accurately to any one may be
doubted; but the notion indicates that the distinction
was of a social or political character.

9. Kasiya : Brahma.

10. Dirghatapas : Vayu. Ghrtsatamas :Agni. The
Bhagavata inserts a Rastra before this prince and
the Vayu a Dharma after him.

11. The eight branches of medical science are, 1.
Salya, extraction of extraneous bodies; 2. Salaka,
treatment of external organic affections : these two

‘constitute surgery; 3. Cikitsé, administration of

medicines or medical treatment in general; 4.
Bhitavidy4, treatment of maladies referred to
demoniac possession; 5. Kaumarabhrtya, midwifery
and management of children; 6. Agada,
alexipharmacy; 7.  Rasdyana,  al-chemical
therapeutics; 8. Bajikarana, use of aphrodisiacs.
Dhanvantari, according to the Brahma Vaivartta
Purana, was preceded in medical science by Atreya,
Bharadvaja and Caraka : his pupil Susruta is the
reputed author of a celebrated work still extant. It

+ ६०

` seems probable that Kasi or Bandrasa was at an

early period a celebrated school of medicine.

12. Some rather curious legends are connected
with this prince in the Vayu and Brahma Puranas
and Hari ४६88 and especially in the Kasi Khanda
of the Skanda Puréna. According to these
authorities, Siva and Parvati, desirous of occupying
Kasi, which Divodasa possessed, sent Nikumbha,
one of the Ganas of the former, to lead the prince to
the adoption of Buddhist doctrines; in consequence
of which he was expelled from the sacred city and
according to the Vayu, founded another on the
banks of the Gomati. We have, however, also some
singular, though obscure intimations of some of the
political events of this and the succeeding reign.
The passage of the Vayu is, भद्रश्रेण्यस्य पुत्राणां
शतमुत्तमधन्विनां हत्वा निवेशयामास दिवोदासो नराधिप:॥
भद्रश्रेण्यस्य Tes तु हतं तेन वलीयसा। भद्रश्रेण्यस्य पुत्रस्तु दुर्हमो नाम
नामत:। दिवोदासेन वालेति घृणया स बविवज्ज्जित:।
विचित्रै: दिवोदासाददृषद्वत्यां वीरो यज्ञे प्रतर्हन:। तेन पुत्रेण बालेन vad तस्य वै
पुन:। वैरस्यान्तं महा Tar तदा तेन विधित्सता॥ ‘The king of
Divodasa, having slain the hundred sons of
Bhadrasrenya, took possession of his kingdom,
which was conquered by that hero. The son of
Bhadrasgrenya, celebrated by the name of
Durddama, was spared by Divodasa, as being an
infant. Protarddana was the son of Divodasa by Drs
advati; and by that great prince, desirous of
destroying all enmity, (was recovered) that
(territory) which had been seized by that young boy
(Durdama).' This is not very explicit and something
is wanted to complete the sense. The Brahma
Purana and Hari Varnsa tell the story twice over,
chiefly in the words of the Vayu, but with some
additions. In chapter 29 we have, first, the first
