148

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Jathara and Devakiita are two mountain ranges
running north and south, and connecting the
two chains of Nisadha and Nila.
Gandhamadana and Kailadsa extend, east and
west, eighty Yojanas in breadth, from sea to
sea. Nisadha and Pariyatra are the limitative
mountains on the westi stretching, like those
on the ease, between the Nila and Nisadha
ranges: and the mountains Trsriga and Jarudhi
are the northern limits of Meru, extending,
east and west, between the two seas. Thus I
have repeated to you the mountains described
by great sages as the boundary mountains
situated in pairs, on each of the four sides of
Meru. Those also, which have been mentioned
as the filament mountains (or spurs), Sitdnta
and the rest are exceedingly delightful. The
vallics embosomed amongst them are the
favourite resorts of the Siddhas and Charanas:
and there are situated upon them agreeable
forests, and pleasant cities, embellished with
the palaces of Visnu, Laksmi, Agni, Strya,
and other deities, and peopled by celestial
spirits, whilst the Yaksas. Raksasas, Daityas,
and Danavas pursue their pastimes in the
vales. These, in short are the regions of
Paradise, or Svarga, the seats of the righteous,
and where the wicked do not arrive even after
a hundred births.

ame भगवान् विष्णुरास्ते हयशिरा द्विज!
वराह: केतुमाले तु भारते कूर्मरूपधृक्।।४९॥
मत्स्यरूपश्च गोविन्द: कुरुष्वास्ते BATA:
विश्वरूपेण waa ad: सर्वेश्वरो हरि:।५०॥
सर्वस्याधारभूतोऽसौ मैत्रेयास्तेऽखिलात्मक:।
यानि किम्पुरुषादीनि वर्षाण्यष्टौ महामुने।

न तेषु श्लोको नायासो नोद्वेग: क्षुद्धयादिकम्॥५१॥
दशद्दादशवर्षाणां सहस्राणि स्थिरायुष:।।५२॥
न ag ada देवो भौमान्यम्भांसि ag वै।
कृत-त्रेतादिका नैव तेषु स्थानेषु कल्पना।।५३॥
waaay वर्षेषु सप्त सप्त कुलाचला:।

नद्यश्च शतशस्तेभ्य: प्रसूता या द्विजोत्तम।। ५४॥

इति श्रीविष्णु पुराणे द्वितीयांशे द्वित्तीयोऽध्याय:।

In the country of Bhadrasva, Visnu resides
as Hayasirsa (the horse-headed); in Ketumala,
as Varaha (the boar); in Bharata, as the
tortoise (Kirma); in Kuru, as the fish
(Matsya); in his universal form, every where;
for Hari pervades all places: he, Maitreya, is
the supporter of all things; he is all things. In
the eight realms of Kimpurusa and the rest (or
all exclusive of Bharata) there is no sorrow,
nor weariness, nor anxiety, nor hunger, nor
apprehension; their inhabitants are exempt
from all infirmity and pain, and live in
uninterrupted enjoyment for ten or twelve
thousand years. India never sends rain upon
them, for the earth abounds with water. In
those places there is no distinction of Krta,
Treta, or any succession of ages. In each of
these Varsas there are respectively seven
principal ranges of mountains, from which, oh
best of Brahmans. hundreds of rivers take their
rise.

aC

NOTES

1. The geography of the Puranas occurs in most
of these works; and in all the main features, the
seven Dvipas, seven seas, the divisions of Jambu-
dvipas, the situation and extent of Meru, and the
sub-divisions of Bharata, is the same. The Agni and
Brahma are word for word the same with our text;
and the Karma, Litiga, Matsya, Markandeya. and
Vayu present many passages common to them and
the Visnu, or to one another. The Vayu, as usual,
enters most fully into particulars. The Bhagavata
differs in its nomenclature of the subordinate
details from all, and is followed by the Padma. The
others either omit the subject, or advert to it but
briefly. The Mahabharata, Bhisma Parva. has an
account essentially the same, and many of the
stanzas are common to it and different Puranas. It
does not follow the same order, and has some
peculiarities; one of which is calling Jambu-dvipas,
Sudar§ana, such being the name of the Jambu-tree;
it is said also to consist of two portions, called
Pippala and Saga, which are reflected in the lunar
orb is in a mirror. ।
