26

THE VISNU-PURANAM

warranted. The waters, it is said in the text of
Manu, were the progeny of Nara. which Kullika
Bhatta explains Paramatma, the supreme soul; that
is, they were the first productions of God in
creation. Ayana. instead of ‘Place of motion,” is
explained by Asraya, ‘place of abiding.’ Narayana
means, therefore, he whose place of abiding was
the deep. The verse occurs in several of the
Puranas, in general in nearly the sante words. and
almost always as a quotation, as in our text: इमं
चोदाहरन्त्यत्र Ves | The Linga, Vayu. and Markandeya
Puranas, citing the same. have a somewhat different
reading; or. आपो नारा a तनव इत्यपा नाम श्रुश्रुम:। अप्मु शेते
यतस्तस्मात् TA नारायण: स्मृत:। 'Apa (is the same (as)
Nara. or bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard
(from the Vedas), is the meaning of Apa. He who
sleeps in them. is thence called Narayana, The
ordinary sense of Tanu is either ‘minute! or ‘body.’
nor does it occur amongst the synonyms of water in
the Nirukta of the Vedas. It may perhaps be
intended to say. that Nara or Apa has the meaning
of 'bodily forms, in which spirit is enshrined, and of
which the waters, with Visnu resting upon them are
a type; for there is much mysticism in the Puranas
in which the passage thus occurs. Even in them.
however, it is introduced in the usual ntanner, by
describing the world as water alone, and Visnu
reposing upon the deep ; ware wer तस्मिन्... कृष्णो
नारायणाख्यस्तु। सुष्वाप सलिले तथा॥ Vayu Purina The
Bhagavata has evidently attempted to explain the
ancient text: पुरुषोऽण्डं विनिर्भद्य यदादौ स बिनिर्गत:।
आत्मनोऽयनमन्विच्छन्मपोऽस्राक्षीच्छुचि:र शुची:। तारस्ववात्सीत्
स्वसृष्टास्रु सहस्रपरिवत्सरान्। तेन नारायणो नाम यदाप: पुरुषोद्भवा:।
"When the embodied god in the beginning divided
the mundane egg, and issued form. then, requiring
an abiding place, he created the waters: the pure
created the pure. In them. his own created be abode
for a thousand years, and thence received the name
of Narayana : the waters being the product of the
embodied deity :' i. e. they were the product of
Nara or Visnu, as the first male or Virat. and were
therefore termed Nara ; and from there being his
Ayana or Sthana, his ‘abiding place’ comes his
epithet of Narayana.

3. The Varaha form was thosen, says the Vayu
Purana because it is an animal delighting to sport in
water, but it is described in many Puranas, as it is in
the Visnu, as, a type of the ritual of the Vedas, as
we shall have further occasion to remark. The

elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in this
form, was, therefore, probably at first an allegorical
representation of the extrication of the world from a
deluge of iniquity by the rites of religion.
Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and
unmystified tradition, an allusion to a geological
fact, or the existence of lacustrine mammalia in the
early periods of the earth.

4, Yajfiapati, 'the bestower of the beneficial
results of sacrifices.,

5. Yajfiapurusa, "the male or soul of sacrifice;
explained by Yajfiamirtti, ‘the form or
personification of sacrifice :’ or Yajfiaradhya, ‘he
who is to be propitiated by it.'

6. Varaha Avatara, The description of the figure
of the boar is much more particularly detailed in
other Puranas. As in the Vayu: “The boar was ten
Yojanas in breadth, a thousand Yojanas high; of the
colour of a dark cloud; and his roar was like
thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks
were white, sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his
eyes like lightning, and he was radiant as the sun;
his shoulders were round, fat and large; he strode
along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat,
his loins were slender, and his body was smooth
and beautiful.” The Matsya Purina describes the
Varaéha in the same words, with one or two
unimportant varieties. The Bhagavata indulges in
that amplification which marks its more recent
composition, and describes the Varaha as issuing
from the nostrils of Brahm. at first of the size of
the thumb, or an inch long, and presently increasing
to the stature of an elephant. That work also
subjoins a legend of the death of the demon
Hiranyaksa, who in a preceding existence was one
of Visnu's doorkeepers, at his palace in Vaikuntha.
Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they
cursed him, and he was in consequence born as one
of the sons of Diti. When the earth, oppressed by
the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the
waters, Visnu was beheld in the subterrene regions,
or Rasatala. by Hira-nyaksa in the act of carrying it
off. The demon claimed the earth, and defied Visnu
to combat; and a conflict took place, in which
Hiranyaksa was slain. This legend has not been met
with in any other Purana, and certainly does not
occur in the chief of them, any more than in our
text In the Moksa Dharma of the Mahabharata. c.
35, Visnu destroys the demons in the form of the
