520

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Bhagavata has ventured to detail. The whole
passage has been published in Maurice's Ancient
History of Hindustan. 11.463; translated apparently
by the late Sir Charles Wilkins. The names have
been much disfigured either by the ‘copyist or
compositor.

8. In the Mahabharata it is said merely that
Uddhava, who was versed in Yoga, foreseeing the
destruction of the Yadavas, went away : that is,
according to the commentator, he practised
penance, and went to heaven: जगाम योगमास्याय परलोकं।
The Bhagavata, taking the hint makes much more
of it than our text, and expands it into a long course
of instruction given by Krsna to Uddhava,
occupying 150 leaves.

9. See Bk. V. Ch. XXI. n. 3. By sending the
Yadavas to Prabhasa, the commentator asserts, Krs
na prevented purposely the Yadavas from obtaining
Mukti. ‘final liberation,’ which would have been the
consequence of dying at Dvaraka. Death at
Prabhasa conferred only Indra's heaven.

10. The Mahabharata describes them as going
forth with horses, elephants, and car, and their
women and abundance of good cheer, and varieties
of wine and meat: बहु नानाविधं चक्रुर्मद्यं मांसमनेकश:।

11. The Bhagavata, like the text, adverts only in
this general manner to the conflict; but the
Mahabhiarata gives the particulars Yuyudhana
reproaches Krtavarman with having aided
Asvatthaman in his night attack on the Pandu camp,
and killing warriors in their sleep. Pradynmna joins
in the abuse. Krtavarman retorts. Krsna looks at
him angrily. Satyaki repeats the story of the
Syamantaka gem, by which he accuses Krtavarman
of being an accomplice in the murder of Satrajit
(Bk. IV. Ch. XID. Satyabhama, the daughter of the
latter, then mixes in the quarrel, and incites Krsna
to avenge her : but Satyaki anticipates him, and
murders Krtavarman. Saineya and the Bhojas attack
Satyaki; the Andhakas defend him ; and the affray
becomes general. Krsna attempts to part the
combatants, until Pradyumna is killed; and then
taking up a handful of rushes, which become an
iron club, he kills indiscriminately all that come in
his way. The conflict continues until the greater
part of the combatants have fallen, including all Krs
na's sons, and he then in wrath sweeps off all the
survivors, except Babhru and Daruka with his
discus.

12. The Mahabharata, as observed at the end of
the last note, adds Babhru, but it presently gets rid
of him, Krsna sends him to take care of the old
people, the women, and children, in Dvaéraka,
whilst Daruka goes to bring Arjnna to their aid: but
as he goes along, overcomie with grief for the loss
of his kindred, and approaching separation from
Krsna, he is killed by a club that is cast from a
snare or trap set by a hunter. Krsna then goes to
Dvaraka, and desires Vasudeva to await the coming
of Arjuna, after which he returns to Rama, and sees
the phenomenon described in the text; the serpent
being Sega, of whom Balarima was the incarnation.
The Bhagavata does not mention this incident,
merely observing that Rama, by the power of Yoga,
returencd into himself ; that is, into Visnu.

13. The women, the elders, and the children,
amongst whom, as we shall presently see, was
Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, who was established
as chief of the Yadavas at Indraprastha, and who
therefore escaped the destruction which
overwhelmed their kinsmen, the Vrsnis. Kukkuras,
and Andhakas, of Dvarakd. This was a fortunate
reservation for the tribes which in various parts of
India, both on the Ganges and in the Dakhin,
profess to derive their origin from the Yadavas.

14. The process is explained by the commentator
: "By the force of Dhyana or abstraction. Krsna
satisfies himself that he is Brahma (ब्रह्मैवाहमिति ध्यात्वा),
or universal spirit: and is next convinced that he is
therefore all things (सर्वभूतान्यप्यहमेव); by which his
individuality ceases.

15 The story is told in the Mahabharata.
Durvaésas was on one occasion hospitably
entertained by Krsna, but the latter omitted to wipe
away the fragments of the meal which had fallen on
the foot of the irascible sane, who thereupon
foretold that Krsna should be killed as in the text.

16 This is an allegorical personage, however, for
Jara signifies ‘infirmity,’ ‘old age,’ 'decay.’

17 The Bhagavata explains how this part of the
foot became exposed. Krsna had assumed one of
the posturea in which abstraction is practised : he
had laid his left leg across his right thigh, by which
the sole of the foot was turned outwards.

18 He became Nirguna, ‘devoid of all qualities.’

KEK
