BOOK IV, 24

401

and Canakya. According to the Matsya Purana,
Kautilya retained the regal authority for a century
but there is some inaccuracy in the copies.

21. This is the most important name in all the
lists, as it can scarcely be doubted that he is the
Sandrocottus or as Athenaeus writes more
correctly, the Sandrocoptus, of the Greeks, as I
have endeavoured to prove in the introduction to
the Mudra Rdksasa. The relative position of
Candragupta, Vidmiséra or Bimbiséra and
AjataSatru, serve to confirm the identification.
Sakya was contemporary with both the latter, dying
in the eighth year of Ajatagatru reign. The
Mahavarmsa says he reigned twenty-four years
afterwards; but the Vayu makes his whole reign but
twenty-five years, which would place the close of it
B.C. 526. The rest of the Saigunaga dynasty,
according to the Vayu and Matsya, reigned 143 or
140 years; bringing their close to B.C. 383. Another
century being deducted for the duration of the
Nandas, would place the accession of Candragupta
B.C. 283. Candragupta was the contemporary of
Seleucus Nicator, who began this reign B.C. 310
and concluded a treaty with him B.C. 305.
Although thercfore his date may not be made out
quite correctly from the Pauranik premises, yet the
error cannot be more than twenty or thirty years.
The result is much nearer the truth than that
furnished by Buddhist authorities. According to the
Mahavarhsa a hundred years had elapsed from the
death of Buddha to the tenth year of the reign of
Kalasoko. He reigned other ten years and his son s
forty-four, making of total of 154 years between
the death of Sakya and the accession of
Candragupta which is consequently placed B.C.
389 or above seventy years too early. According to
the Buddhist authorities, Chan-ta-kutta or
Candragupta commenced his reign 396 B.C.
Burmese Table; Prinsep's Useful Tables. Turnour,
in his Introduction, giving to Kalasoko eighteen
years subsequent to the century after Buddha,
places Candragupta's accession B.C. 381, which, he
observes, is sixty years too soon; dating, however,
the accession of Candragupta from 323 B.C or
immediately upon Alexander’s death, a period too
early by eight or ten years at least. The discrepancy
of dates, turnour is disposed to think, proceeds
from some intentional perversion of the
Buddhistical chronology. Introduction P.L. The

commentator on our text says that Candragupta was
the son of Nanda by a wife named Mura, whence
he and his descendants were called Mauryas : चन्द्रगुप्तं
नन्दस्यव पत्न्यन्तरस्य मुरासज्ञस्य पुत्रं Ae प्रथमं। Tod
considers Maurya a corruption of Mori, the name of
a Rajput tribe. The Tika on the Mahdvarnsa builds a
story on the fancied resemblance of thc word to
Maytra, S. Mori, Pr. 'a peacock’. There being
abundance of pea-fowl in the place where the
Sakya tribe built a town, they called it Mori and
there princes were thence called Mauryas. Turnour,
Introduction to the Mahdvamsa, . XXxix.
Candragupta reigned, according to the Vayu P., 24
years; according to the Mahdvarhsa, 34; to the
Dipavasanso, 24.

22. So the Mahavarnsa, Bindusdra. Burmese
Table, Bin-tu-sara. The Vayu has Bhadrasara, 25
years; the Bhagavata, Varisara. The Matsya names
but four princes of this race, although it concurs

with the others in stating the series to consist of ten.
The names are also differently arranged and one is
peculiar ; they are, Satadhanvan, Vrhadratha, Suka
and Dagaratha.

23. ASoka, 36 years, Vayu; Suka, 26, Matsya;
ASsokavarddhana, Bhagavata; ASoka and
Dhammagoka, Mahavarnga. This king is the most
celebrated of any in the annals of the Buddhists. In
the commencement of his reign he followed the
Brahmanical faith, but became a convert to that of
Buddha and a zealous encourager of it. He is said to
have maintained in his palace 64,000 Buddhist
priests and to have erected 84,000 columns or topes
throughout India. A great convocation of Buddhist
priests was held in the eighteenth year of his reign,
which was followed by missions of Ceylon and
other places. According to Buddhist chronology he
ascended the throne 218 years after the death of
Buddha, B.C. 325. As the grandson of
Candragupta, however, he must have been some
time subsequent to this or agreeably to the joint
duration of the reigns of Candragupta and
Bindusara, supposing the former to have
commenced his reign about B.C. 315, forty-nine
years later or B.C. 266. The duration of his reign is
said to have becn thirty-six years, bringing it down
to B.C. 230 : but if we deduct these periods from
the date assignable to Candragupta, of B.C. 283, we
shall place Agoka's reign from B.C. 234 to 198.
Now it is certain that a number of very curious
