BOOK II, CHAP. 9

197

भ्रमन्तमनु तं यान्ति नक्षत्राणि च चक्रवावत्॥ २॥
सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ arr नक्षत्राणि we: सह।
वातानीकमयैर्बयैर्धुवे बद्धानि तानि वै॥ ३॥
नारायण: परं धाम्नां तस्याधार: स्वयं BAU KN
उत्तानपादपुत्रस्तु तमाराध्य प्रजापतिम्।
स ताराशिशुमारस्य ga: Gad व्यवस्थित:॥५॥
आधार: शिशुमारश्च सर्वाध्यक्षो जनार्दन:।
श्रुवस्य शिशुमारश्च ga भानुर्व्यवस्थित:॥ ६॥

{ जगच्चेदं सरे ।
येन faa! विधानेन तन्ममैकमना: शृणु॥७॥

The form of the mighty Hari which is
present in heaven, consisting of the
constellations, is that of a porpoise, with
Dhruva situated in the tail. As Dhruva
revolves, it causes the moon, sun and stars to
turn round also; and the lunar asterisms follow
in its circular path; for all the celestial
luminaries are in fact bound to the polar-star
by aerial cords. The porpoise-like figure of the
celestial sphere is upheld by Narayana, who
himself in planetary radiance, is seated in its
heart; whilst the son of Uttanapada, Dhruva, in
consequence of his adoration of the lord of the
world, shines in the tail of the stellar
porpoise’. The upholder of the porpoise-
shaped sphere is the sovereign of all,
Janarddana. This sphere is the supporter of
Dhruva; and by Dhruva the sun is upstayed.
Upon the sun depends this world, with its
gods, demons, and men. In what manner the
world depends upon the sun, be attentive, and
you shall hear.

विवस्वानष्टभिर्मासैरादायापो रसात्मिका:।
वर्षत्युम्बु ततश्चान्नमन्नादप्यखिलं जगत्।। ८॥
विवस्वानंशुभिस्तीक्ष्णैरादाय जगतो जलम्।

सोमं पुष्यत्यथेन्द्रश्च वायुनाडीमयैर्दिवि।। ९॥
नालैर्विक्षिपतेऽभ्रेषु धूमाग्न्यनिलमूर्तिषु।

न भ्रश्यन्ति यतस्तेभ्यो जलान्यभ्राणि तान्यत:।। १०॥
अभ्रस्था: प्रपतन्त्यापो वायुना समुदीरिता:।

संस्कारं कालजनितं मैत्रेयासाद्य निर्मला:। gen
सरित्समुद्रभौमास्तु तथाप: प्राणिसम्भवा:।
चतु:प्रकारा भगवानादत्ते सविता मुने।। १२॥
अनभ्रगतमेवोर्वयाँ wer: क्षिपति रश्मिभि:।। १३॥

न याति नरकं weal दिव्यस्नानं fe तत् TAN १४॥
दृष्टसूर्यं हि waft पतत्यप्नैर्विना fea:
आकाशगङ्गासलिलं we गोभि: क्षिप्यते रवे:।। १५॥
कृत्तिकादिषु ऋक्षेषु विषमेष्वम्बु यद्दिव:।

दृष्टार्क पतति ज्ञेयं ae गाङ्गं दिग्गजोज्झितम्।। १६॥
युग्मर्कषेषु च यत्तोयं पतत्यर्कोज्झितं दिव:।

we सूर्यरश्मिभि: war: समादाय निरस्यते।। १७॥
आकाशगङ्गासलिलं दिव्यस्नानं महामुने।। १८॥

During eight months of the year the sun
attracts the waters, which are the essence of all
fluids, and then pours them upon earth (during
the other four month) as rain’: from rain grows
corn; and by corn the whole world subsists.
The sun with his scorching rays absorbs the
snoisture of the earth, and with them nourishes
the moon. The moon communicates, through
tubes of air, its dews to the clouds, which,
being composed of smoke, fire, and wind (or
Vapour), can retain the waters with which they
are charged: they are therefore called Abhras,
because their contents are not dispersed’.
When however they are broken to pieces by
the wind, then watery stores descend, bland,
and freed from every impurity by the
sweetening process of time. The sun,
Maitreya, exhales watery fluids from four
sources, — seas, rivers, the earth, and living
creatures. The water that the sun has drawn up
from the Ganga of the skies he quickly pours
down with his rays, and without a cloud; and
men who are touched by this pure rain are
cleansed from the soil of sin, and never see
hell: this is termed celestial ablution. That rain
which falls whilst’ the sun is shining, and
