BOOK IV, 7

341

Braéhmana, alike devoid of affluence, valour
and power." Satyavati agreed to her mother's
proposal and they exchanged messes.

अथ वनादभ्यागत्य सत्यवतीमृषिरपश्यत् आह
चैनाम्-अतिपापे! किमिदमकार्य्य भवत्या Hay, अतिरौद्रं ते
वपुरालक्ष्यते, नूनं त्वया त्वन्मातृसत्कृतश्चरुरुपयुक्त:; न
युक्तमेतत्।। १३॥
मारणनिष्ठ: क्षत्रियाचार: पुत्रो भविष्यति,
अस्याश्चोपशमरुचिर्ब्रह्मणाचार:॥ १४॥

इत्याकर्ण्यव सा तस्य wel जग्राह। प्रणिपत्य च
एनमाह,- भगवन्। मयैतदज्ञानादनुष्ठितं प्रसादं मे ae,
मैवंविध: पुत्रो भवतु, काममेवंविध: पौत्रो भवतु इत्युक्तो
मुनिरप्याह-एवमस्तु इति॥ १५॥

When Rcika returned home and beheld
Satyavati, he said to her, "sinful woman, what
have you done! I view your body of a fearful
appearance. Of a surety you have eaten the
consecrated food which was prepared for your
mother : you have done wrong. In that I had
infused the properties of power and strength
and strength and heroism; in your, the qualities
suited to a Brahmana, gentleness, knowledge
and resignation. In consequence of having
reversed my plants, your son shall follow a
warrior's propensities and use weapons and
fight and slay. Your mother's son shall be born
with the inclinations of a Brahmana and be
addicted to peace and piety." Satyavati,
hearing this fell at her husband's feet and said,
"My lord, I have done this thing through
ignorance; have compassion on me; let me not
have a son such as you have foretold : if such
there must be, let it be my grandson, not my
son." The Muni, relenting at her distress,
replied, "So let it be."

अनन्तरञ्च सा जमदग्निमजीजनत्। तन्माता च विश्चामित्रं
ware सत्यवती च कौशिकी am नद्यभवत्।

जमदग्निरिक्ष्वाकुवंशोद्भवस्य रेणोस्तनयां रेणुकामुपयेमे।

सकललोकगुरोर्नारायणस्यांशं जमदग्निरजीजनत्।। १६॥

विंश्चामित्रपुत्रस्तु भार्गव wa शुन:शेफो am देवैर्दत्त:,
ततश्च देवरातनामाभवत्। ततश्च ते मधुच्छन्द-जय-कृतदेव-
देवाष्टक-कच्छप-हरीतकाख्या विश्वामित्रपुत्रा बभूवु:॥ १७॥

ware बहूनि कौशिकगोत्राणि ऋष्यन्तरेषु वैवाह्यानि
भवन्तीति।

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे agaist सप्तम: अध्याय:॥

Accordingly in due season she gave birth to
Jamadagni; and her mother brought forth
Visvamitra. Satyavati afterwards became the
Kausiki river"? Jamadagni married Renuka,
the daughter of Renu, of the family of Iksvaku
and had by her the destroyer of the Ksatriya
race, Parasurama, who was a portion of
Narayana, the spiritual guide of the universe."

LEGEND OF PARASURAMA
(FROM THE MAHABHARATA)

"Jamadagni (the son of Ricika’*) was a pious
sage, who by the fervour of his devotions, while
engaged in holy study, obtained entire possession
of the Vedas. Having gone to king Prasenajit, he
demanded in marriage his daughter Renuka and the
king gave her unto him. The descendant of Bhrgu
conducted the princess to his hermitage and dwelt
with her there and she was contented to partake in
his ascetic life. They had four sons and then a fifth,
who was Jamadagnya, the last but not the least of
the brethren. Once when her sons were all absent,
to gather the fruits on which they fed, Renuka who
was exact in the discharge of all her duties, went
forth to bathe. On her way to the stream she beheld
Citraratha, the prince of Mrittikavati, with a garland
of lotuses on his neck, sporting with his queen in
the water and she felt envious of their felicity.
Defiled by unworthy thoughts, wetted but not
purified by the stream, she returned disquieted to
the hermitage and her husband perceived her
agitation. Beholding her fallen from perfection and
shorn of the lustre of her sanctity, Jamadagni
reproved her and was exceedingly wroth. Upon this
there came her sons from the wood, first the eldest,
Rumanvat, then Susena, then Vasu and then
Visvavasu; and each, as he entered, was
