38

THE VISNU-PURANAM

`एकान्तिन: सदा ब्रह्मध्यायिनो योगिनो हि ये।

TST AL षरमं स्थानं यत् तु पश्यन्ति सूरय:।॥३८॥

गत्वा गत्वा निवर्त्तन्ते चन्द्रसूर्य्यदयो ग्रहा:।

अद्यापि न निवर्त्तन्ते द्वादशाक्षरचिन्तका:॥ ३ ९॥

त्तामिस्रमन्धतामिस्र महारौरवरौरवौ।

असिपत्रवनं घोरं कालसूत्रमवीचिमत्।॥४०॥

विनिन्दकानां वेदस्य यज्ञव्याघातकारिणाम्।

स्थानमेतत् समाख्यातं स्वधर्म्मत्यागिनश्च Ty eu

श्री विष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे षष्ठोऽध्याय:।

Those Brahmanas who lead religious lives
go to the world of the eighty-eight thousand
saints: and that of the seven Rsis is the seat of
pious anchorets and hermits. The world of
ancestors is that of respectable householders:
and the region of Brahma is the asylum of
religious mendicants.'? The imperishable
region of the Yogis is the highest seat of Vis
nu, where they perpetually meditate upon the
supreme being, with minds intent on him
alone: the sphere where they reside, the gods
themselves cannot behold. The sun, the moon,
the planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to
be, but those who internally repeat the mystic
adoration of the divinity, shall never know
decay. For those who neglect their duties, who
revile the Vedas, and obstruct religious rites,
the places assigned after death are the terrific
regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of fear,
and of great terror; the fearful hell of sharp
swords, the hell of scourges and of a waveless
sea,"

fe se oe
NOTES

1. The creation of mankind here described is
rather out of its place, as it precedes the birth of the
Prajapatis or their progenitors: but this want of
method is common to the Puranas, and is evidence
of their being compilations from various sources.

2. This original of the four castes is given in
Manu. and in most of the Purdnas. We shall see;
however, that the distinctions are subsequently
ascribed to voluntary election, to accident, or to
positive institutions.

3. According to Manu, oblations ascend to and
nourish the sun; whence the rain falls upon earth,
and causes the growth of com: burnt-offerings are
therefore the final causes of the support of
mankind,

4. This description of a pure race of beings is not
of general occurrence in the Puranas. It seems here
to be abridged from a much more detailed account
in the Brahmanda, Vayu. and Markandeya Puranas.
In those works Brahma is said to create, in the
beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand pairs of each of
the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect
happiness during the Krta age, and only gradually
become subject to infirmitics as the Treté or second
age advances.

5. These eight perfections, or Siddhis, are not the
supernatural faculties obtained by the performance
of the Yoga, They are described, the commentator
says. in the Skanda and other works: and from them
he extracts their description: 1. Rasollasa, the
spontaneous or prompt evolution of the juices of
the body, independently of nutriment from without:
2. Tripti, mental satisfaction, or freedom from
sensual desire: 3. Sdmya, sameness of degree: 4.
Tulyata, similarity of life, form, and feature: 5.
Visoka, exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6.
Consummation of penance and meditation, by
attainment of true knowledge: 7. The power of
going every where at will: 8. The faculty of
reposing at any time or in any place. These
attributes are alluded to though obscurely, in the
Vayu. and are partly specified in the Markandeya
Purana.

6. In the other three Puranas, in which this
legend has been found. the different kinds of
inhabited places are specified and introduced by a
series of land measures. Thus the Markandeya
states, that 10 Paramdnus==1 Parastiksma; 10
Parastiksmas=I Trasarenu; 10 Trasarenus=! particle
of dull, or Mahirajas; 10 Mahirajasas = 1 Balagra,
hair's point;'10 Balaégras=1 Likhya; 10 Likhhyds=
Yika; 10 Yikas=~ I heart of barley (Yavodara); 10
Yavodaras=I grain of barley of middle size: 10
barley grains=l finger, or inch; 6 fingers=a Pada, or
foot (the breadth of it); 2 Padas=1 Vitasti, or span;
2 spans =! Hasta, or cubit: 4 Hastas=a Dhanu, a
Danda, or staff, or 2 Narikas; 2000 Dhanus= a
Gavyati; 4 Gavyatis-a Yojana. The measurement of
