12

THE VISNU-PURANAM

He causes all things to dwell in him. and he
abides in all: whence he is named Vasu: being
resplendent as the sun, he is called Deva: and he
who is both these, is denominated Vasudeva., See
also b. VI. c. 5.

11. The commentator argues that Vasudeva must
be the Brahma, or supreme being, of the Vedas,
because the same circumstances are predicated of
both, as eternity, omnipresence, omnipotence, etc.;
but he does not adduce any scriptual text with the
name Vasudeva.

12. Time is not usually enumerated in the
Puranas as an element of the first cause, but the
Padma Purina and the Bhagavata agree with the
Visnu in including it. It appears to have been
regarded at an earlier date as an independent cause:
the commentator on the Moksa Dharma cites a
passage from the Vedas, which he understands to
allude to the different theories of the cause of
creation: काल: स्वभावो नियतिर्यदृच्छया भूतानि योनि: पुरुष:।
Time, inherent nature, consequence of acts, self-
will, elementary atoms, matter, and spirit, asserted
severally by the Astrologers, the Buddhists, the.
Mimansakas. the Jains, the Logicians, the
Sarhkhyas. and the Vedantis. Kpovoé was also one
of the first generated agents in creation, according
to the Orphic theogony.

13. The creation of the world is very commonly
considered to be the Lild (tem), sport or
amusement, of the Supreme Being.

14. The attributes of Pradhdna. the chief
(principle or element). here specified, conform
generally to those ascribed to it by the Samkhya
philosophy (Sarnkhya Karika, p. 16, etc,), although
come of them are incompatible with its origin from
a first cause. In the Sarhkhya this incongruity does
not occur; for there Pradhana is independent, and
coordinate with primary spirit. The Puranas give
rise to the inconsistency by a lax use of both
philosophical and pantheistical expressions. The
most incongruous epithets in our text are however
explained away in the comment. Thus nitya (fe),
‘eternal’ is said to mean ‘uniform, not liable to
increase or diminution.’ fet सदैकरूपं वृद्धयदिहीनं।
Sandasadatmaka (सदसदात्मकं), ‘comprehending
what is and what is not.’ means ‘having the power
of both cause and affect, (कार्य्यकारणशक्तियुक्तं) as
preceding from Visnu, and as giving origin to
material things. Anadi, ‘without beginning,’ means

‘without birth’ (जन्मशून्यं), not being engendered by
any created things but proceeding immediately
from the first cause. ''The mother,’ or literally ` the
womb of the world (जगद्योनिं), means ‘the passive
agent in creation,’ operated on or influenced by the
active will of the Creator. The first part of the
passage in the text is a favourite one with several of
the Puranas, but they modify it and apply it after
their own fashion. In the Visnu the original is,
अव्यक्तं कारणं यत् तत् प्रधानमृषिसत्तमै:।

प्रोच्यते प्रकृति: सूक्ष्मा Pret सदसदात्मकं।।

rendered as above. The Vayu, Brahmanda. and
Kirma Purinas have

प्रधानं प्रकृतिश्चैव यमाहुस्तत्त्वचिन्तका:।

The indiscrete cause, which is uniform, and both
cause and effect, and whom those who are
acquainted with first principles call Pradhana and
Prakrti— is the uncognizable Brahma, who was
before all: afaa wert समवर्त्तत। But the application
of two synonyms of Prakrti to Brahma seems
unnecessary at least. The Brahma Purana corrects
the reading apparently: the first line is as before :
second is, प्रधानं Yes यस्मान् निर्म्ममे विश्वमीदृशं। The
passage is placed absolutely, There was an
indiscrete cause eternal, and cause and effect,
which was both matter and spirit (Pradhana and
Purusa), from which this world was made. Instead
of ईदृशं ‘such’ or 'this,' some copies read ईश्वर: ‘from
which Isvara or god (the active deity or Brahma)
made the world., The Hari Varnga has the same
reading, except in the last term, which it makes ईश्वरं
that is. according to the commentator, 'the world,
which is Isvara. was made. The same authority
explains this indiscrete cause, avyakta karana, to
denote Brahma, "the creator; तं वै fafs ब्रह्माणं स्रष्टारं
सर्व्वभूतानां। an identification very unusual, if not
inaccurate, and possibly founded on
misapprehension of what is stated by the Bhavisya
Purana: aq कारणमव्यक्तं नित्यं सदसदात्मकं । तद्विशिष्ट: स पुरुषो
लोके ब्रह्मेति seta एवं स भगवानण्ड इति। ‘That male or
spirit which is endowed with that which is the
indiscrete cause. etc, is known in the world as
Brahma: he being in the egg, ac.' The passage is
precisely the same in Manu, I. 11; except that we
have '‘visista, instead of ‘visistha:’ the latter is a
questionable reading, and is probably wrong: the
sense of the former is.'detached;' and the whole
