BOOK I, CHAP. 12

77

त्वत्तो विश्वमिदं जातं त्वत्तो भूतभविष्यती।। ६०॥

त्वद्रूपधारिणश्चान्तर्भूतं सर्वमिदं जगत्।

त्वत्तो यज्ञ: सर्वहुत: पृषदाज्यं पशुद्विधा॥ ६१॥

You are the male with a thousand heads, a
thousand eyes, a thousand feet, who traversest
the universe, and passest ten inches beyond its

contact.” Whatever has been, or is to be, that,
Purusottama, you are. From you sprang Virat.

Swarat, Samrat, and Adhipurusa . The lower,
and uppcr, and middlc parts of the earth are
not independent of you: from you is all this
universc, all that has been, and that shall be:
and all this world is in you, assuming dus

universal form . From you is sacrifice derived,
and all oblations, and curds, and ghee, and
animals of either class (domestic or wild).

त्वत्तो ऋचोऽच सामानि त्वत्तश्छन्दांसि जज्ञिरे।
त्वत्तो यजूंष्यजायन्त त्वत्तोऽश्वाश्चैकतोदत:। ६ २॥
गावस्त्वत्त: समुद्धूतास्त्वत्तोऽजा अवयो मृगा:।
त्वन्मुखाद् ब्राह्मणास्त्वत्तो बाह्वो: क्षत्रमजायत। ६ ३॥
वैश्यास्तवोरुजा: शूद्रास्तव पद्भ्यां समुद्गता:।
अक्ष्णो: सूर्योऽनिल: श्रोत्राच्चन्द्रमा मनसस्तव।। ६४॥
प्राणो न शुषिराज्जातो मुखादग्निरजायत।
नाभितो गगनं द्यौश्च शिरस: समवर्त्तत।६५॥

From you the Rg-Veda. the Sama. the
metres of the Vedas, and the Yajur-Veda are
born. Horses. and cows having teeth in one
jaw only’, proceed form you; and from you
come goats, sheep, deer. Brabmans sprang
from your mouth; warriors from your -arms;
Vaisyas from your thighs; and Sidras from
your fect. From thine eyes come the sun; from
thine ears, the wind; and from your mind, the
moon: the vital airs from your central vein;
and fire from your mouth: the sky from your
navel; and hcaven from your head: the regions
from thine ears; the earth from your feet. All
this world was derived from you.

न्यग्रोध: सुमहानल्पे यथा बीजे व्यवस्थित:।। ६६॥
संयमे विश्वमखिलं बीजभूते तथा त्वयि।

बीजादङ्कुत्सम्पूतोन्यप्रोघ: सुसमुत्थित:।। ६७॥

विस्तारञ्च यथा याति त्वत: सृष्टौ तथा जगत्।

यथा fe कदली नान्या UATE वाथ दृश्यते॥ ६८॥
एवं विश्वस्य नान्यत्वं तत्स्थायीश्वर दृश्यते।

ह्लादिनी सन्धिनी साम्बत् त्वय्येका सर्वसंस्थितौ।। ६९॥
ह्लादतापकरी मिश्रा cafes नो गुणवज्जिते।
पृथग्भूतैकभूताय भूतभूताय ते नम:।।७०॥
प्रभूतभूतभूताय YS भूतात्मने नम:।
व्यक्तप्रधानपुरुषविराट् सम्राट् TAS तथा।। ७१॥
विभाव्यतेऽन्त:करणै: पुरुषेष्वक्षयो भवान्।

सर्वस्मिन् सर्वभूतस्त्वं सर्व: सर्वस्वरूपधूक्॥७२॥
ad त्वत्तस्ततश्च त्वं नम: सर्वात्मनेऽस्तु ते।
सर्वात्मकोऽसि सर्वेश सर्वभूतस्थितो यत:॥७३॥

As the wide-spreading Nyagrodha (Indian
fig) tree is compressed in a small seed’, so, at
the time of dissolution, the whole univcrse is
comprehended in you as its germ. As the
Nyagrodha germinates from the sced and
becomes first a shoot, and then rises into
loftiness, so the created world proceeds from
you, and expands into magnitude. As the bark
and leaves of the Plantain tree are to be seen in
its stem, so you are the seem of the universe,
and all things are visible in you. The faculties
of the intellect, that are the cause of pleasure
and of pain, abide in you as one with all
existence; but the sources of pleasure and of
pain, singly or blended, do not exist in you
who are exempt from all qualities’. Salutation
to you, the subtile rudiment, which, being
single, becomes manifold. Salutation to you.
soul of existent things, identical with the great
elements. You, imperishable, are beheld in
spiritual knowledge as perceptible objects, as
nature, as spirit, as the world, as Brahma, as
Manu, by internal contemplation. But you are
in all, the element of all; you are all, assuming
every form; all is from you. and you are from
thyself. I salute you, universal soul: glory be to
you. You are one with all things: oh lord of all,
you are present in all things.
