३64

THE VISNU-PURANAM

place where the mare had perished, Krsna said
to Balarama, "Do you remain in the car, while
I follow the villain on foot and put him to
death; the ground here is bad; and the horses
will not be able to drag the chariot across it."
Balardma accordingly stayed with the car and
Krsna followed Satadhanvan on foot; when he
had chased him for two kosa, he discharged
his discus and although Satadhanwan was at a
considerable distance, the weapon struck off
his head. Krsna then coming up, searched his
body and his dress for the Syamantaka jewel,
but found it not. He then returned to
Balabhadra and told him that they had effected
the death of Satadhanvan to no purpose, for
the precious gem, the quintessence of all
worlds, was not upon his person. When
Balabhadra heard this, he flew into a violent
rage and said to Vasudeva, "Shame light upon
you, to be thus greedy of wealth! I
acknowledge no brotherhood with you. Here
lies my path. Go whither you please; I have
done with Dvarak4, with you, with all our
house. It is of no use to seek to impose upon
me with your perjuries." Thus reviling his
brother, who fruitlessly endeavoured to
appease him, Balabhadra went to the city of
Videha, where Janaka’* received him
hospitably and there he remained. Vasudeva
returned to Dvaraka. It was during his stay in
the dwelling of Janaka that Duryodhana, the
son of Dhrtardstra, learned from Balabhadra
the art of fighting with the mace. At the
expiration of three years, Ugrasena and other
chiefs of the Yadavas, being satisfied that Krs
na had not the jewel, went to Videha and
removed Balabhadra's suspicions and brought
him home.

अक्रूरोऽप्युत्तममणिसमुद्भूतसुवर्णध्यानपरस्ततो
यज्ञानीजे॥४९॥

सवनगतौ हि क्षत्रियवैश्यौ fer ब्रह्महां भवतीत्यतो
दीक्षाकवचं प्रविष्ट wa तस्थौ द्विषष्टिवर्षाणि।।५०॥

एवं पि बोपसर्गदर्भि दिवं
नाभूत्। ५ १॥

अथाक्रूरपक्षीयैर्भोजै: शत्रुघ्ने सात्वतस्य प्रपौत्रे व्यापादिते
भोजै: सहाक्रूरो द्वारकामपहाय अपक्रान्त:॥५ २॥

Akrira, carefully considering the treasures
which the precious jewel secured to him,
constantly celebrated religious rites and
purified with holy prayer'’, lived in affluence
for fifty-two years; and through the virtue of
that gem there was no dearth nor pestilence in
the whole country.’ At the end of that period,
Satrughna, the great grandson of Satvata, was
killed by the Bhojas and as they were in bonds
of alliance with Akrira, he accompanied them
in their flight from Dvaraka.

तदपक्रान्तिदिनादारभ्य तत्रोपसर्गव्यालानावृष्टिमर-
काद्युपद्रवा बभूवु। अथ यादव-बलभद्रोग्रसेन-
समवेतोऽमन्त्रयद् भगवानुरगारिकेतन:, कियदिदमेकदैव
प्रचुरोपद्रवागमनमेतदालोच्यताम्॥ & ३॥

इत्युक्ते अन्धकनामा यदुवृद्ध: प्राह,- अस्याक्ररस्य पिता
श्चफल्को AM यत्र यत्राभूत्, wat तत्र दुर्भिक्ष-
मरकानावृष्टयादिकं ATTN ५४॥

From the moment of his departure various
calamities, portents, snakes, dearth, plague and
the like, began to prevail; so that he whose
emblem is Garuda called together the
Yadavas, with Balabhadra and Ugrasena and
recommended them to consider how it was
that so many prodigies should have occurred
at the same time. On this Andhaka, one of the
elders of the Yadu race, thus spoke
"Wherever Svaphalka; the father of Akrira,
dwelt, there famine, plague, dearth and other
visitations were unknown.

काशिराजस्य विषयेऽत्यन्तानावृष्टयां श्वफल्कोऽनीयत्,
ततस्तत्क्षणादेव देवो aah काशिराजस्य पत्न्याश्च गर्भे
कन्या ॥५५॥

सापि पूर्णेऽपि प्रसूतिकाले ta निश्चक्राम। we तस्य
गर्भस्य gent वर्षाण्यनिष्कामतो aq काशिराजस्तु
तामात्मजां गर्भस्थामाह, yf! sere जायसे?
निष्क्रम्यताम् आस्यन्ते द्रष्टुमिच्छामि। स्वकाञ्च मातरं किमिति
fat क्लेशयसि som सा गर्भस्थैव cine, ar!
यद्येकेकां गां fey दिने ब्राह्मणेभ्य: प्रयच्छसि,
