BOOK VI, CHAP. 7

557

Khandikya then said to Kesidhvaja.
“Tllustrious sage, inform me what is that
perfect asylum of the mind, resting on which it

destroys all the products of (human)
infirmity.”
केशिध्वज उवाच

आश्रयश्चेतसो Te द्विधा तच स्वभावत:।

qe मूर्तममूर्तञ्च परञ्चापरमेव A viol

त्रिविधा भावना भूप! विश्वमेतन्निबोध मे।

ब्रह्माख्या कर्म्मसंज्ञा च तथा चैवोभयात्मिका॥। ४८॥

ब्रह्मभावात्मिका ह्येका कर्मभावात्मिका परा।

उभयात्मिका तथैवान्या त्रिविधा भावभावना।।४९॥

सनन्दनादयो TEL ब्रह्मभावनया युता:।

कर्मभावनया चान्ये देवाद्या: स्थावराश्चरा:॥५०॥

To this, Kesidhvaja replied: “The asylum
of mind in spirit (Brahma), which of its own
nature is twofold, as being with or without
form; and each of these is supreme and
secondary”. Apprehension of spirit", again, is
threefold. I will explain the different kinds to
you: they are, that which is called Brahma,
that which is named from works, and that
which comprehends both. The mental
apprehension which consists of Brahma is one;
that which is formed of works is another; and
that which comprehends both is the third: so
that mental apprehension (of the object or
asylum of the thoughts) is threefold.
Sanandana and other (perfect sages) were
endowed with apprehension of the nature of
Brahma. The gods and others, whether
animate or inanimate, are possessed of that
which regards acts.

हिरण्यगर्भादिषु च ब्रह्मकर्मात्मिका द्विधा।

बोधाधिकारयुक्तेषु विद्यते भावभावना।। ५ १॥

अक्षीणेषु समस्तेषु विशेषज्ञानकर्मसु।

विश्वमेतत् परं चान्यद् भेदभिन्नदृशां नृप॥ ५२॥

प्रत्यस्तमितभेदं यत् सत्तामात्रमगोचरम्।

वचसामात्मसंवेद्यं TAM ब्रह्मसंज्ञितम्॥ ५३॥

The apprehension that comprehends both

works and spirit exists in Hiranyagarbha and

others, who are possessed of contemplative
knowledge of their own nature, and who also
exercise Certain active functions, as creation
and the rest. Until all acts, which are the
causes of notions of individuality, are
discontinued, spirit is one thing, and the
universe of another, to those who contemplate
objects distinct and various; but that is called
true knowledge, or knowledge of Brahma,
which recognises 70 distinctions, which
contemplates only simple existence, which is
indefinable by words, and is to be discovered
solely in one’s own spirit.

aa विष्णो: wt रूपमरूपस्याजमक्षरम्।

विश्वरूपाच्च त्रैरूप्यलक्षणं परमात्मन:।। ५४॥

न तद्योगयुजा शक्यं नृप! चिन्तयितुं यत:।

तम: Wet हरे रूपं चिन्तयेद विश्वगोचरम्।॥५५॥

हिरण्यगर्भो भगवान् वासवोऽथ प्रजापति: .

मारुतो वसवो रुद्रा भास्करास्तारका ग्रहा:।। ५६॥

गनधर्व-यक्षा दैत्याद्या: सकला देवयोनय:।

मनुष्या: पशव: शैला: समुद्रा: सरितो FAT ५७॥

भूप! भूतान्यशेषाणि भूतानां ये च हेतव:।

प्रधानादि विशेषान्तं चेतनाचेतनात्मकम्।। ५ ८॥

एकपादं द्विपादञ्च बहुपादमपादकम्।

मूर्त्तमेतद्धरे रूपं भावनात्रितयात्मकम्॥५९॥

That is the supreme, imperishable form of
Visnu, who is without (sensible) form, and is
characterised as a condition of the supreme
soul, which is variously modified from the
condition of universal form. But this condition
cannot be contemplated by sages in their
(early) devotions, and they must therefore
direct their minds to the gross form of Hari,
which is of universal perceptibility. They must
meditate upon him as Hiranyagarbha, as the
glorious Vasava, as Prajapati, as the winds, the
Vasus, the Rudras, the suns, stars, planets,
Gandharvas, Yaksas, Daityas, all the gods and
their progenitors, men, animals, mountains,
oceans, rivers, trees, all beings, and all sources

of beings, all modification whatever of nature
and its products, whether sentient or
