BOOK प्रा CHAP. 11 257

second is called by Manu the Kaya tirtha, from Ka,
a synonym of Prajapati.

3. The Sraddha is commonly an obsequial or
funeral sacrifice, but it implies offerings to the
progenitors of an individual and of mankind and
always forms part of a religious ceremony on an
occasion of rejoicing or an accession of prosperity,
this being termed the Abhyudaya or Vyddhi
Sraddha. As. Res. VII. 270.

4. So Manu, II. 30, 31, 32. The examples given
in the comment are, Somasarman, Indravarman,
Candragupta and Sivadasa, respectively appropriate
appellations of men of the four castes.

5. Or Sarhskaras; initiatory ceremonies,
purificatory of the individual at various stages.

6. Or the vow or pledge he has taken, that he will
follow for life the observances of the student or
ascetic; both of which are enumerated in the
Nimmaya Sindhu, as acts prohibited in the Kali age;
aman is not to continue a student or Brahmacari,
i.e. a coenobite, for life; nor is he to become a
mendicant without previously passing through the
order of householder. In practicc, however, the
prohibition is not infrequently disregarded.

7. By this is to be understood, according to the
commentator, merely a young girl, but at the same
time one not immature; for otherwise, he observes,
a man of thirty, by which age he completes his
sacred studies, would espouse a girl of but ten years
age. According to Manu, however, the period of
religious study does not terminate until thirty-six;
and in the East a girl of twelve would be
marriageable. The text of Yajfiavalkya has merely
the word Yaviyasi, 'a very young woman.’ It is
worthy of remark here, that neither that text, nor the
text of Manu, nor the interpretation of our text,
authorises the present practice of the nuptials of
children. The obligation imposed upon a man of a
life of perfect continence until he is more than
thirty is singularly Malthusian.

8. For the credit of Hindu taste it is to be noticed
that the commentator observes the hemstitch in
which this last clause occurs is not found in all
copies of the text.

9, See Manu, III. 5.

10. These different modes of marriage are
described by Manu, III. 27.

wee
