476

पराशर उवाच

इत्युक्त: पवनो गत्वा सर्वमाह शचीपतिम्।

ददौ सोऽपि सुधर्माख्यां सभां वायो: पुरन्दर: ॥ १६॥

वायुना wea दिव्यां सभां ते ag पुङ्खवा:।

बुभुजु: सर्वरत्नाढ्यां गोविन्दभुजसंश्रयात्।। १७॥

विदिताखिलविज्ञानो सर्वज्ञानमयावपि।

शिष्याचार्यक्रमं वीरौ ख्यापयन्तौ यदूत्तमौ।। १८॥

Accordingly Vayu went, and delivered the

message to the hushand of Saci, who
immediately gave up to him the hall
Sudharman, and Vayu conveyed it to the
Yadavas, the chiefs of whom thenceforth
possessed this celestial court, emblazoned with
jewels, and defended by the arm of Govinda.
The two excellent Yadu youths, versed in all
knowledge, and possessed of all wisdom, then
submitted to instruction, as the disciples of
teacher.

तत: सान्दीपनि काश्चमवन्तीपुरवासिनम्।

अस्त्रार्थं जग्मतुर्वीरौ बलदेव-जनार्द्दनौ॥ १९॥

तस्य शिष्यत्वमभ्येत्य गुरुव्रत्तपरौ हि ah

दर्शयाञ्चक्रतुर्वीरावाचारमखिले जने॥२०॥

सरहस्यं धनुर्वेदं ससङ्गृहमधीयताम्।

अहोरात्रैश्चतु:षष्ट्यातुद्भुतमभूद् द्विज:॥ २ १॥

विचितन्त्य तौ तदा मेने प्राप्तौ चन्द्र-दिवाकरौ॥ २ २॥

अस्त्रग्राममशेषञ्च प्रोक्तमान्नवाप्य तौ।

ऊचतुरव्रियतां या ते दात्वाया गुरु दक्षिणा॥ २३॥

सोऽप्यतीन्द्रियमालोक्य तयो: कर्म महामति:।

अयाचत मृतं पुत्रं प्रभासे लवणार्णवे।। २४॥

गृहीतास्त्रौ ततस्तौ तु सार्ध्यपात्रो महोदधि:।

उवाच न मया पुत्रो हत: सान्दीपमेरिति॥ २५॥

दैत्य: पञ्चजनो नाम शङ्खरूप: स बालवम्।

जग्राह सोऽस्ति सलिले ममैवासुरसूदन।। २६॥
_ Accocdingly they repaired to
Sandipani~who, though born in Kasi, resided
at Avanti-to study the science of arms, and,
becoming his pupils, were obedient and

THE VISNU-PURANAM

attentive to their master, exhibiting an
example to all men of the observance of
instituted rules. In the course to sixty-four
days they had gone through the elements to
military science, with the treatises on the use
of arms, and directions for the mystic
incantacions, which secure the aid of
supernatural weapons,’ Sandipani, astonished
at such proficiency, and knowing that it
exceeded human faculties, imagined that the
sun and moon had become his scholars. When
they had acquired all that he could teach, they
said to him, "Now say what present shall be
given to you, as the preceptor's fee.” The
prudent Sandjpani, perceiving that they were
endowed with more then mortal powers,
requested them to give him his dead son,
drowned in the sea of Prabhasa.’ Taking up
their arms, they marched against the ocean;
but the all-comprehending sea said to them, “I
have not killed the son of Sandipani; a demon
named Panchajana, who lives in the form of a
conch shell, seized the boy: he is still under
my waters.

इत्युक्तोऽन्तर्ज्जल गत्वा हत्वा पञ्चजनं खलम्।
POY जग्राह तस्यास्थि-प्रभवं शङ्खमुत्तमम्।। २७॥
यस्य नादेन दैत्यानां बलहानिरजायत।
देवानां age तेजो यात्यधर्मश्च संक्षयम्।। २ ८॥
तं पाञ्चजन्यमापूर्य गत्वा यमपुरीं हरि:।
बलदेवश्च बलवान् जित्वा वैवस्वतं यमम्।।। २९॥
तं बालं यातनासंस्थं यथापूर्वशरीरिणम्।
fs प्रदत्तवान् कृष्णो बलश्च बलिनां ATF ol
TOUS पुन: प्राप्तावुग्रसेनेन पालिताम्।
प्रहरष्टपुरुषस्त्रीकावूभौ राम-जनार्द्दनौ॥ ३ १॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे एकविंश: अध्याय:।

On hearing this, Krsna plunged into the
sea; and having slain the vile Panchajana, he
took the conch shell, which was formed of his
bones (and bore it as his horn), the sound of
which fills the demon hosts with dismay,

animates the vigour of the gods, and
annihilates unrighteousness. The heroes also
