486

THE VISNU-PURANAM

illustrious Dantavakra, Viduratha, Sigupala,
Jarasandha, Salya, and other kings, indignant
at the insult, exerted themselves to kill Krsna,
but were repelled by Balarama and the
Yédavas.

कुण्डिनं न प्रवेक्ष्यामि अहत्वा युधि केशवम्।

कृत्वा प्रतिज्ञां रुक्मी च हन्तुं कृष्णमभिद्रुत:॥९॥
निर्जित: पातितश्चोरव्यां लीलयैव स चक्रिणा ॥ १०॥
हन्तुं कृतमति: कृष्णो रुक्मिणं युद्धुर्मदम्।

प्रणम्य याचितो gery रुक्मिण्या sary हरि।। gen
एक एव मम भ्राता न हन्तव्यस्त्वयाधुना।

कोपं नियम्य देवेश। भ्रातृभिक्षा प्रदीयताम्।। १२॥

Rukmin, vowing that he would never enter
Kundina again until he had slain KeSava in
fight, pursued and overtook him, In the
combat that ensued, Krsna destroyed with his
discus, as if in sport, the host to Rukmin, with
all its horse, and elephants, and foot, and
chariots, and overthrew him, and hurled him
on the ground, and would have put him to
death, but was withheld by the entreaties to
Rukmini. "He is my only brother," she
exclaimed, "and must not be slain by you:
restrain your wrath, O divine lord, and give me
my brother in charity."

इत्युक्तेन परित्यक्त: कृष्णेनाकिष्टकर्मणा।

रुक्मी भोजकटं नाम पुरं कृत्वावसत् तदा॥ १३॥
निर्जित्य रुक्मिणं सम्यगुपयेमे स रुक्मिणीम्।
राक्षसेन विवाहेन सम्प्राप्तां मधुसूदन:॥ १४॥
तस्यां TST प्रद्युम्नो मदनांश: स वीर्य्यवान्।
जहार शम्बरो यं वै यो जघान च शम्बरम्॥ १५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे षड्विंश: अध्याय:॥

Thus addressed by her, Krsna, whom no
acts affect, spared Rukmin;’ and he (in pur-
suance of his vow) founded the city Bhojakat
a,’ and ever afterwards dwelt therein. After the
defeat of Rukmin, Krsna married Rukmini in
due form, having first made her his own by the

Rakshasa ritual.” She bore him the gallant
Pradyumna, a portion of the deity of love. The

demon Sambara carried him off, but he slew
the demon.

NOTES

1 Vidarbha is the country of Berar, and the name
remains in the present city of Bedar: the capital
however, Kundinapur, is commonly identified with
a place called Kundapur about forty miles north-
east to Amaravati (in Berar).

2 When she had gone forth from the city to
wordship Ambika: Bhagavata. Indrani. the wife of
Indra: Hari Vamsa. Our text tells the circumstance
more concisely than the others.

3 After depriving him of his eyebrows and hair.
In the Bhagavata, Balarama also interferes in
favour of Rukmin, and reproves Krsna _ for
disfiguring him.

4 Of course this was somewhere in the
neighbourhood of Kundina or Vidarbha, and
usually supposed to be situated on the Narmada.

5 That is, by violence: thus Manu: "The seizure
of a maiden by force, whilst she weeps and calls for
assistance, after her kinsmen and friends have been
slain in battle, or wounded, and their houses broken
open, is the marriage called Raksasa." III. 33.
According to the Bhagavata, Rukmini sends to
invite Krsna to carry her off, and instruct him how
to proceed.

eek
