564

THE VISNU-PURANAM

discontinuance of action; and the derivation of
all that exists from works. There is nothing
else, venerable Brahman, that I have to inquire
of you; and forgive me if your answer to my
questions have imposed upon you any fatigue.
Pardon me the trouble that I have given you,
through that amiable quality of the virtuous
which makes no distinction between a disciple
and a child.

WUT उवाच
`एतत्ते यन्मयाख्यातं पुराणं वेदसम्मितम्।
श्रुतेऽस्मिन् सर्वदोषोत्थपापराशि: प्रशाम्यति।। १२॥
wig प्रतिसर्गश्च वंशो मन्वन्तराणि च।

वंशानुचरितं great मयात्र तव कीर्तितम्।। १३॥

आत्र देवास्तथा दैत्या गधर्वोरगराक्षसा:।

यक्षा विद्याधरा: सिद्धा: कथ्यन्तेऽप्सरसस्तथा।। १४॥

मुनया भावितात्मान: कथ्यन्ते तपसान्विता:।

चातुर्वर्ण्य यथा पुंसां विशिष्टचरिता नरा:।। १५॥

पुण्या: प्रदेशा मेदिन्या: पुण्यो नद्योऽथ सागरा:।

पर्वताश्च महापुण्याश्चरितानि च धीमताम्। १६॥

वर्णधर्मादयो धर्मा वेदधर्माश्च कृत्स्नश:।

येषां संश्रवणान् सद्य: सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते।। १७॥

Parasara said— I have related to you this
Purana, which is equal to the Vedas in
sanctity, and by hearing which all faults and
sins whatever are expiated. In this have been
described to you the primary and secondary
creation, the families of the patriarchs, the
Manvantaras, the regal dynasties; the gods,
Daityas, Gandharvas, serpents, Raksasas, Yaks
as, Vidyddharas, Siddhas, and heavenly
nymphs; Munis endowed with spiritual
wisdom, and practisess of devotion; the
distinction of the four castes, and the actions
of the most eminent amongst men; holy places
on the earth, holy rivers and oceans, sacred
mountains, and legends of the truly wise; the
duties of the different tribes, and the
observances enjoined by the Vedas. By
hearing this, all sins are at once obliterated.

उत्पत्ति-स्थिति-नाशानां हेतुर्यो जगतोऽव्यय:।
स सर्वभूत: सर्वात्मा कथ्यते भगवान् हरि:। १८॥

अवशेनापि यन्नाम्नि कीर्तिते सर्वपातकै:।
पुमान् विमुच्यते wa: सिंहत्रस्तैर्वृकैरिव॥ १९॥

In this aiso the glorious Hari has been
revealed, the cause of the creation,
preservation, and destruction of the world; the
soul of all things, and himself all things: by
the repetition of whose name man _ is
undoubtedly liberated from all sins, which fly
like wolves that are frightened by a lion.

चन्नाम कीर्तितं भक्त्यां विलापनमनुत्तमम्।
मैत्रेयाङोषपापानां धातूनामिव पावक:।। २०॥
कलिकल्मषमत्युग्रं नरकार्तिप्रदं नृणाम्।

प्रयाति विलयं सद्य: Was यत्रानुसंस्मृते।। २ १॥
किम्नरैर्वसुभि: साध्यैर्विश्वदेवादिभि: सुरै:।। २२॥
यक्ष-रक्षोगणे: सिद्धैर्दैत्य-गन्धर्व-दानवै:।
अप्सरोभिस्तथा तारानक्षत्रै: सकलैर्गहै:।। २३॥
सप्तर्षिभिस्तथा धिष्ण्यैर्धिष्णयाधिपतिभिस्तथा।

ब्राह्मणाद्यैर्मनुष्यैश्च तथैव पशुभिर्मृगै:।। २४॥
सरीसृपैविहट्गैश्च प्रेताद्यै: समहीरुहै:।
वना-द्वि-सागर-सरित्-पातालै: सधरादिभि:।। २५॥
भेरोरिवाणुर्यस्यैतदू यन्मयञ्च द्विजोत्तम।। २६॥

स सर्व: सर्ववित् सर्वस्वरूपो Sra:

SrA भगवान् विष्णुरत्र पापप्रणाशन:।॥ २७॥

The repetition of his name with devout
faith is the best remover of all sins, destroying
them as fire purifies the metal from the dross,
The stain of the Kali age, which ensures to
men sharp punishments in hell, is at once
effacted by a single invocation of Hari. He
who is all that is, the whole egg of Brahma,
which Hiranyagarbha, Indra, Rudra, the
Adityas, the Asvins, the winds, the Kinnaras,
the Vasus, the Sddhyas, Visvadevas, the
celestial gods, the Yaksas, serpents, Raksasas,
the Siddhas, Daityas, Gandharvas, Dadnavas,
nymphs, the stars, asterisms, planets, the seven
Rsis, the regents and superintendents of the
quarters, men, Brahmanas and the rest,
animals tame and wild, insects, birds, ghosts,
and goblins, trees, mountains, woods, rivers,
