BOOK II, CHAP. 8

191

(Radka); and the day when one digit is deficient
(Anumati), are all seasons when gifts are
meritorious.

तपस्तपस्यौ मधुमाधवो च
शुक्र: शुचिश्चायनमुत्तरं स्यात्।
नभो नभस्योऽथ इषश्च सोर्ज:
We: सहस्याविति दक्षिणं स्यात्।७६॥

The sun is in his northern declination in
the months Tapas, Tapasya, Madhu, Madhava,
Sukra, and Suci; and in his southern in those
of Nabhas, Nabhasya, Isa, Urja, Sahas,
Sahasya.!”

लोकालोकश्च य: शैल: प्रागुक्तो भवतो मया।
लोकपालास्तु चत्व,रस्तत्र तिष्ठन्ति सुर्वता:।॥७७॥
सुधामा शङ्खपाच्यैव कर्द्दमस्यात्मजो द्विज।
हिरण्यरोमा चैवान्यश्चतुर्थ: केतुमानपि॥७८॥

On the Lokdloka mountain, which I have
formerly described to you, reside the four holy
protectors of the world, or Sudhaman and
Sankhapada, the two sons of Kardama, and
Hiranyaroman, arid Ketumat.” Unaffected by
the contrasts of existence, void of selfishness,
active, and unencumbered by dependents, they
take charge of the spheres, themselves abiding
on the four cardinal points of the Lokaloka
mountain. `

fear निरभिमाना निस्तन्द्रा निष्परिग्रहा:।
लोकपाला: स्थिता ह्येते लोकालोके चतुर्दिशम्॥७९॥
उत्तरं यदगस्त्यस्य अजवीथ्याश्च दक्षिणम्।
पितृयान: स वै wear पैश्चानरपथाद्बहि:।। ८ ott
तत्रासते महात्मान ऋषयो येऽग्निहोत्रिण:।
भूतारम्भकृतं ब्रह्म शंसन्त ऋत्विगुद्यता:॥ ८ १॥
प्रारभन्ते तु ये लोकास्तेषां पन्था: स दक्षिण:।
चलितं ते पुनर्ब्रह्म स्थापयन्ति युगे युगे॥ ८ २॥
सन्तत्या तपसा चैव wate: get च।
जायमानास्तु पूर्वे च पश्चिमानां गृहेषु ane ३॥
पक्चिमाश्चैव पूर्वेषां जायते निधनेष्विह।
एवमावर्त्तमानास्ते तिष्ठन्ति नियतव्रता:।
सवितुर्दक्षिणं मार्गं श्रिता ह्याचन्द्रतारकम्॥ ८४॥

On the north of Agastya, and south of the
line of the Goat, exterior to the Vaisvanara
path, lies the road of the Pitrs.2! There dwell
the great Rsis, the offerers of oblations with
fire, reverencing the Vedas, after whose
injunctions creation commenced, and who
were discharging the duties of ministrant
priests: for as the worlds are destroyed and
renewed, they institute new rules of conduct,
and reestablish the interrupted ritual of the
Vedas. Mutually descending from each other,
progenitor springing from descendant, and
descendant from progenitor, in the alternating
succession of births, they repeatedly appear in
different houses and races along with their
posterity, devout practices and _ instituted
observances, residing to the south of the solar
orb, as long as the moon and stars endure.”

नागवीथ्युत्तरं यच्च सप्तर्षिभ्यश्च दक्षिणम्।

उत्तर: सवितु: पन्था देवयानश्च स स्मृत:।। ८५॥
तत्र तॆ वशिन: सिद्धा विमला ब्रह्मचारिण:।
सन्ततिं ते जुगुप्सन्ति तस्मान्मृत्युर्जितश्च तै:।। ८ ६॥
अष्टाशीतिसहस्राणां मुनीनामूर्ध्वरेतसाम्।
उदकषन्थानपर्य्यप्ण: स्थिता ह्याभूतसंप्लवम्।। ८७॥
तेऽसम्प्रयोगाल्लोभस्य मैथुनस्य च वर्जनात्।
इच्छाद्देषाप्रवृत्तया च भूतारम्भविवर्ज्जनात्।। ८ ८॥
पुनश्चलाकामसंयोगाच्छब्दादेरदोषदर्शनांत्।

इत्येभि: कारणै: शुद्धास्तेऽभृतत्वं fe भेजिरे॥८९॥
त्रैलोक्यस्थितिकालोऽयमपुन्म्मार उच्यते।। ९०॥
ब्रह्महत्याश्वमेधाभ्यां पुण्यपापकृतो विधि:।
आभूतसंप्लवं wrt फलमुक्तं तयोद्विज।। ९ १॥।
यावन्मात्रे west तु मैत्रेयावस्थितो श्रुव:।
क्षयमायाति तावत् तु भूमेराभूतसंप्लवे॥ ९ २॥

The path of the gods lies to the north of the
solar sphere, north of the Nagavithi,” and
south of the seven Rsis. There dwell the
Siddhas, of subdued senses, continent and
pure, undesirous of progeny, and therefore

victorious over death: eighty-cight thousand of
these chaste beings tenant the regions of the
