112

consumed." And the Danavas piled a mighty
heap of wood around the prince, and kindled a
fire, to burn him, as their master had
commanded,

were sara
तातैष वह्नि: पवनेरितोऽपि
न मां दहत्यत्र समन्ततोऽहम्।
पश्यामि पद्मास्तरणास्तृतानि
शीतानि सर्वाणि दिशां मुखानि।।४७॥
But Prahlada cried, "Father, this fire,
though blown up by the winds, burneth me
not; and all around I behold the face of the

skies, cool and Fragrant, with beds of lotus
flowers.”'

WIS उवाच

अथ दैत्येश्वरं प्रोचुर्भार्मवस्यात्मजा द्विजा:।

पुरोहिता महात्मान: साम्ना संस्तूय वाग्मिन:।४८॥

Then the Brahmanas who were the sons of
Bhargava, illustrious priests, and reciters of
the Sama-Veda, said to the king of the
Daityas,

पुरोहिता ऊचु:
TRY! नियम्यतां कोपो बालेऽत्र तनयेऽनुजे।
कोपो देवनिकायेषु ax ते सफलो यत:।।४९॥
तथा तथैनं बालं ते शासितारो वयं नृप।
यथा विपक्षनाशाय विनीतस्ते भविष्यति।। ५०॥
बालत्वं सर्वदोषाणां दैत्यराजास्पदं यत:।
ततोऽत्र कोपमत्यर्थं योक्तुमर्हसि नार्भके।। ५ १॥
न त्यक्ष्यति हरे: पक्षमस्माकं वचनाद् यदि।
तत: Heat वधायास्य करिष्यामो निवर्तिनीम्।। ५ २॥

Priests said~ "Sire, restrain your wrath
against your own son. How should anger
succeed in finding a place in heavenly
mansions? As for this lad, we will be his
instructors, and teach him obediently to labour
for the destruction of your foes. Youth is the
season, king, of many errors, and you should
not therefore be relentlessly offended with a
child. If he will not listen to us, and abandon

THE VISNU-PURANAM

the cause of Hari, we will adopt infallible
measures to work his death."

पराशर उवाच
दैत्यैर्निष्काशयामास पुत्रं पावकसञ्चयात्॥ ५ ३॥

The king of the Daityas, thus solicited by
the priests, commanded the prince to be
liberated from the midst of the flames.

ततो गुरुगृहे बाल: स वसन् बालदानवान्।
अध्यापयामास मुहुरुपदेशान्तरे गुरो:॥५४॥

Again established in the dwelling of his
preceptor, Prahlada gave lessons himself to the
sons of the demons, in the intervals of his
leisure.

प्रह्लाद उवाच
श्रूयतां परमार्थो मे दैतेया दितिजात्मजा:।
न चान्यथैतन्मन्तव्यं नात्र लोभादिकारणम्।। ५५॥
जन्म बाल्यं aa: सर्वो जन्तु: प्राप्नोति चौवनम्।
अब्याहतैव भवति ततोऽनुदिवसं जरा।। ५६॥
ततश्च मृत्युमभ्येति जन्तुर्दैत्येश्वरात्मजा:।
weal दृश्यते चैतदस्माकं भवतां तथा।। ५७॥

"Sons of the offspring  श्रिंप्,`` he was
accustomed to say to them. "hear from me the
supreme truth; nothing else is fit to be
regarded; nothing else here is an object to be
coveted. Birth, infancy, and youth and the
portion of all creatures; and then succeeds
gradual and inevitable decay, terminating with
all beings, children of the Daityas. in death:
this is manifestly visible to all; to you as it is
to me.

मृतस्य च पुनर्जेन्म भवत्येतच्च नान्यथा।

आगमोऽयं तथा तत्र नोपादानं विनोद्भव:।॥ ५ il
गर्भवासादि यावत् तु पुनर्जन्मोपपादनम्।
समस्तावस्थकं WAS दु:खमेवावगम्यताम्॥ ५९॥
wae बालबुद्धित्वाद् दु:खमेव fe A FANG ol
अत्यन्तस्तिमिताङ्गानां व्यायामेव सुखैषिणाम्।
भ्रान्तिज्ञानाव्रृताक्षाणां प्रहारोऽपि सुखायते।। ६१॥
