BOOK HI, CHAP. 11

261

bound in the bonds of acts; may all obtain
satisfaction from the food left them by me and
enjoy happiness.
येषां न माता न पिता न बन्धु-
नैवान्नसिद्धिर्न तथान्नमस्ति।
तत्तृप्तयेऽन्नं भुवि दत्तमेतत्
ते arg aft मुदिता भवन्तु॥५१॥
भूतानि सर्वाणि तथान्नमेत-
दहञ्च विघ्णुर्न यतोऽन्यदस्ति।
. मूतमन्नं
प्रयच्छामि भवाय तेषाम्।। ५ २॥
चतुर्दशो भूतगणो य एष
aa स्थिता येऽखिलभूतसङ्घा:।
तृप्त्यर्थमन्नं हि मया विसृष्टं
तेषामिदं ते मुदितं भवन्तु॥५३॥

May they who have neither mother, nor
father, nor relations, nor food, nor the means
of preparing it, be satisfied and plcased with
the food presented for their contentment.’
Inasmuch as all beings and this food and I and
Visnu are not different, J therefore give for
their sustenance the food that is one with the
body of all creatures. May all beings, that are
comprehended in the fourteen orders of
existent things,'? be satisfied with the food
bestowed by me for their gratification and be
delighted.’

इत्युचार्य नरो दद्यादन्नं श्रद्धासमन्वित:।
भुवि सर्वोपकाराय गृही सर्वाश्रयो यत:॥५४॥

ये चान्ये पतिता: केचिदपुत्रा: सन्ति मानवा:।।५५॥

Having uttered this prayer, let the devout
believer cast the food upon the ground, for the
nourishment of all kinds of beings; for the
householder is hence the supporter of them all.
Let him scatter food upon the ground for dogs,
outcasts, birds and all fallen and degraded
persons.

अतिथिग्रहणार्थाय त्तदूर्दध वा यथेच्छया।॥५६॥

अतिथिं तत्र word पूजयेत् स्वागतादिना।
तथासनप्रदानेन पादप्रक्षालनेन च।। ५७॥

श्रद्धया चान्नदानेन प्रियप्रश्नोत्तरेण च।
शच्छतश्चानुयानेन प्रीतिमुत्पादयेद गृही।॥ ५ ८॥
अज्ञातकुलनामानमन्यदेशादुपागतम्।

पूजयेदतिथिं ware नैकग्रामनिवासिनम्।। ५९॥
अकिञ्चनमसम्बन्द्धमज्ञातकुलशीलिनम्।
असम्पूज्यातिथिं भुञ्जन् भक्तुकामं व्रजत्यघ:।। ६०॥

“The householder is then to remain at
eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes to
milk a cow," or longer if he pleases, to await
the arrival of a guest. Should such a one
arrive, he is to be received with a hospitable
welcome; a Seat is to be offered to him and his
feet are to be washed and food is to be given
him with liberality and he is to be civilly and
kindly spoken to; and when he departs, to be
sent away by his host with friendly wishes. A
householder should ever pay attention to a
guest who is not an inhabitant of the same
village, but who comcs from another place and
whose name and lineage are unknown. He who
feeds himself and neglects the poor and
friendless stranger in want of hospitality, goes
to hell. Let a householder who has a
knowledge of Brahma reverence a guest,
without inquiring his studies, his school, his
practices or his race.'*

पित्रर्थञ्चापरं विप्रमेकमप्याशयेन्नृप!

तद्देश्यं विदिताचारसम्भूतिं पञ्चयज्ञियम्।। ६ २॥
अन्नाग्रञ्च ATES हन्तकारोपकल्पितम्
निवापभूतं भूपाल! श्रोत्रियायोपकल्पयेत्॥ ६ ३॥
दद्याच्च भिक्षात्रितयं परिव्राड्ब्रह्मचारिणाम्। |
इच्छया च बुधो दद्याद् विभवे सत्यवारितम्॥ ६४॥
इत्येतेऽतिथय: प्रोक्ता: प्रागुक्ता भिक्षवश्च ये।
चतुर: पूजयन्नेतान् नृयज्ञर्णात् प्रमुच्यते।। ६५॥
अतिथिर्यस्य भग्नाशो गृहात् प्रतिनिवर्त्तते।

स त्तस्मै दृष्कृतं दत्त्वा पुण्यमादाय गच्छति।। ६६॥
धाता प्रजापति: शक्रो वह्निर्वसूगणोऽर्यमा।
प्रविश्यातिथिमेवैते भुञ्जतेऽन्नं नरेश्वर॥ ६७॥
