382

THE VISNU-PURANAM

being adopted by Bharata, is one and the same with
Vitatha, as our text relates. Thus in the Vayu, the
Maruts bring to Bharata, already sacrificing for
progency (भरद्वाजं तत: Ya वार्हस्पत्यं), Bharadvaja, the
son of Brhaspati; and Bharata receiving him says.
"This Bharadvaja shall be Vitatha :', तत: सवितथो नाम
भरद्वाजस्तदास्म्यहं। The Matsya also says, the Maruts in
compassion took the child and being pleased with
Bharata's worship, gave it to him and he was named
Vitatha : जगृहुस्तं भरद्वाजं मरुत: कृपयानिवता: | तेन ते मरुतस्तस्य
मरुत्सोमेन तुष्टुवु:। उपनिन्यु र्भरद्वाजं पुत्रार्थं भरताय वै। ged तु वितथे
तस्मिन् कृते वै पुत्रजन्मनि। ततस्तु वितथो नाम भरद्वाजो TA sar
And the Agni tells the whole story in one verse : ततो
मरुद्भिरानीय पुत्रस्म तु बृहस्पते:। संक्रामितो भरद्वाज: क्रतुभि
वितथोऽभवत्। ‘Then the son of Brhaspati, being taken
by the winds. Bharadvaja was transferred with
sacrifice and was Vitatha.' The account given in the
Bhagavata is to the same purpose. The
commentator on the text also makes the matter
clear enough : भरतपुत्रत्वदशायां वितथेतिनाम्। 'The
name of Bharadvaja in the condition of son of
Bharata was Vitatha.' It is clear that a new-born
infant could not be the officiating priest at a
sacrifice for his own adoption, whatever the
compiler of the Hari Varhsa may please to assert.
From Bharadvaja, a Brahmana by birth and king by
adoption, descended Brihmanas and Ksatriyas, the
children of two fathers : तस्मादेव भरद्वाजाद्बाह्मणा: क्षत्रिया
भुबि। द्वामुख्यायणनामान: «wa द्विपितरस्तु adn The
Mahabharata, in the Adi Parvan, tells the story very
simple. In one place, v. 3710, it says that Bharata,
on the birth of his children proving vain, obtained
from Bharadvaja, by great sacrifices, a son,
Bhimanyu; and in another passage it makes
Bhimanyu the son of Bharata by Sunanda,
daughter of Sarvasena, king of Kasi; p. 139, v.
3785. The two are not incompatible.

16. Manyu : Bhagavata. Suketu : Agni. But the
Brahma and Hari Varhsa omit this and the next
generation and make Suhotra, Anuhotra, Gaya,
Garga and Kapila the sons of Vitatha : they then
assign to Suhotra two sons, Kasika and Ghrtsamati
and identify them and their descendants with the
progeny of Ayu, who were kings of KAsi (see Bk.
IV. Ch. VIII. n. 15); a piece of confusion
unwarranted by any other authority except the
Agni.

17. Vrhat, Aharya, Nara, Garga : Matsya.

18. Guruvirya and Trideva : Vayu. The first is
called Gurudhi, Matsya; and Guru, Bhagavata :
they agree in Rantideva. The Bhagavata describes
the great liberality of this prince and his practice of
Yoga. According to a legend preserved in the
Megha Duta, his sacrifices of kine were so
numerous, that their blood formed the river
Carmanvati, the modern Cambal.

19. Sivi : Matsya.

20. The other authorities concur in this
statement; thus furnishing an additional instance of
one caste proceeding from another. No reason is
assigned : the commentator says it was from some
cause ; केनचित् कारणाद्बाह्मणाश्चबभूबु:।

21. Durbhaksaya : Vayu. Uruksat :
Duritaksaya : Bhagavata.

22. Trayaruni, Puskararuni, Kavi; all became
Brahmanas : उरुक्षत: सुताह्येते Fes ब्राह्मणतां गता:। Matsya :
and there were three chief branches of the Kavyas
or descendants of Kavi : काव्यानां | वराह्येते त्रय: प्रोक्ता
महर्षय: गर्गा:। संकृतय: काव्या: क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातय:। Gargas,
Sankrtis and Kavyas. Ibid.

23. In the Mahabharata, Suhotra is the son of
Bhimanyu; and in one place the father of
Ajamidha, etc., and in another of Hastin. The
Brahma Purana in some degree and the Hari Varhsa
in a still greater, have made most extraordinary
confusion in the instance of this name. In our text
and in all the best authorities we have three
Suhotras, perfectly distinct : 1. Suhotra, great-
grandson of Amavasu, father of Jahnu and ancestor
of Visvamitra and the Kausikas (see Bk. III. Ch.
XI.); 2. Suhotra son of Ksatravrddha and grandson
of Ayus and progenitor of the race of Kasi kings
(Bk. TV. Ch. VIII); and 3. Suhotra the son of
Vrhatksatra, grandson of Vitatha and parent of
Hastin. In the two blundering compilations
mentioned, we have, first (Hari Varnsa c. 20), a
Suhotra son of Vrhatksatra, of the race of Puru; his
descent is not given, but, from the names which
follow Suhotra, the dynasty is that of our present
text : secondly (Hari Varhsa c. 27), Suhotra son of
Kajficana, of the line of Amavasu and father of
Jahnu, etc. thirdly (Hari Varnsa c. 29), Suhotra the
son of Ksatravrddha and progenitor of the Kasi
kings : fourthly (Hari Varga 32), we have the first
and third of these personages confounded; Suhotra
is made the son of Vitatha and progenitor of the
Kasi kings, the dynasty of whom is repeated; thus

Matsya,
