BOOK IV, 3

321

head downwards, in mid-air, forming a
constellation in the southern hemisphere, along
with other new planets and stars formed by
Visvamitra. The Bhagavata has an allusion to this
legend, saying that Trisanku is still visible in
heaven ; अद्यापि दिवि दृश्यते। The Vayu furnishes some

further information from an older source
`पौराणिका: जना। विश्वामित्रप्रसादेन
त्रिशङ्कर्दिवि राजते। देवै: सार्द्ध महातेजाऽनुग्रहात्तस्य धीमत:।

त्रिभिर्यामैस्त्रिशङ्कुग्रहभूषिता॥ Both my copies leave a

blank where it is marked and similar passage does
not elsewhere occur; but the word should probably
be निशा and the whole may be thus rendered ; 'Men
aquatinted with the Puranas recite these two
stanzas; "By the favour of Visvamitra the illustrious
Trisanku shines in heaven along with the gods,
through the kindness of that sage. Slowly passes the
lovely night in winter, embellished by the moon,
decorated with three watches and ornaments with
the constellation Triganku." This legend is therefore
clearly astronomical and alludes possibly to some
reformation of the sphere by Visvamitra, under the
patronage of Triganku and in opposition to a more
ancient system advocated by the school of Vasistha.
It might be no very rash conjecture perhaps, to
identify Triganku with Orion, the three bright stars
of whose belt may have suggested the three Sankus
(stakes or pins) which form his name.

9. The Pauranik lists generally dismiss
Harigcandra very summarily, but he makes a
conspicuous figure in legends of an apparently later
date. In the Mahabharata, Sabha Parva, it is stated
that he resides in the court of Indra, to which he
was elevated for his performance of the Rajastya
sacrifice and for his unbounded liberality. This
seems to have served as the ground work of the tale
told in the Markandeya and Padma Puranas, of his
having given his whole country, his wife and son
and finally himself, to Visvamitra, in satisfaction of
his demands for Daksina. In consequence he was
elevated with his subjects to heaven, from when,
having been insidiously led by Narada to boast of
his merits, he was again precipitated. His
repentance of his pride, however, arrested his
downward descent and he and his train paused in
mid-air. The city of Hariscandra is popularly
believed to be at times still visible in the skies. The
indignation of Vasistha at Visvamitra's

insatiableness produced a quarrel, in which their
mutual imprecations changed them to two birds, the
Sarali, a sort of Turdus and the Vaka or Crane. In
these forms they fought for a considerable term,
until Brahma interposed and reconciled them. The
Bhagavata alludes to this story, in its notice of

: Harigcandra; but the Vayu refers the conflict to the

reign of a different prince : see c. 2.n.11. According
to the Siva Purana, Harigcandra was an especial
worshipper of that deity; and his wife Satyavati was
form of Jaya, one of Durga's handmaids.

10. Also read Rohita. Traces of his name appear
in the strongholds of Rohtas, in Bihar and in the
Punjab. The Bhagavata has a legend of his having
been devoted to Varuna, before his birth, by his
father, who having on various pleas deferred
offering his son as promised, was afflicted by a
dropsy. Rohita at last purchased Sunahgephas, who
was offered as a victim in his stead : see hereafter,
note on Sunagephas.

11. Omitted ; Agni, Litga and Matsya.

12, Omitted : Agni, Dhundhu ; Linga and
Karma. Campa, founder of Campimilini
Bhagavata. But all other authorities make Campa a
different person, a descendant of Anga : see family
of Anu, of the lunar race.

13. Kuruka : Linga and Ktrma. Bharuk ;
Bhagavata. .

14. Descendants of Yadu. The first springs from
a prince who is the twelfth and the second from one
who is the eighteenth, in the lunar line and both are
thus contemporary with a prince who is the thirty-
fifth of the solar dynasty. The Vayu adds, that they
were assisted by Sakas, Yavanas, Kambojas,
Paravas and Pahlavas.

15. The Haihayas we shall have further occasion
to notice. The Sakas are, no doubt, the Sacae or
Sakai of the classical geographers, Scythians and
Indo-Scythians, Turk of Tartar tribes, who
established themselves, about a century and half
before our era, along the western districts of India
and who are not improbably connected with our
Saxon forefathers. The Yavanas are the Ionians or
Greeks. The Kambojas were a people on the north-
west of India, of whom it is said that they were
remarkable for a capital breed of horses. There is
an apparent trace of their name in the Caumogees
of Kaferistan, who may have retreated to the
mountains before the advance of the Turk tribes.
