BOOK VI, CHAP. 5

547

तस्मात् तत्प्राप्तये यत्न: कर्त्तव्य: पण्डितैर्नरै:।

तत्राप्तिहेतुर्जानञ्च ad चोक्तं महामुने।। ६०॥

शब्दब्रह्मागममयं परं wer विवेकजम्॥ ६ eu

ard तम इवाज्ञानं दीपवच्चेन्दियोद्भवम्।

यथा सूर्यस्तथा ज्ञानं ae fart! विवेकजम्॥६ 21

It should therefore be the assiduous
endeavour of wise men to attain unto god‘.
The means of such attainment are said, great
Muni, to be knowledge and works. Knowledge
is of two kinds, that which is derived from
scripture, and that which is derived from
reflection. Brahma that is the word is
composed of scripture; Brahma that is
supreme is produced of reflection’. Ignorance
is utter darkness, in which knowledge,

obtained through any sense (as that of

hearing), shines like a lamp; but the
knowledge that is derived from reflection
breaks upon the obscurity like the sun.

मनुरप्याह वेदार्थं स्मृत्वा यन्मुनिसत्तम।

तदेतच्छूयतामत्र Tea Tea मम।६३॥

द्वे ब्रह्मणी वेदितव्ये शब्दब्रह्म परञ्च यत्।

शब्दब्रह्मणि निष्णात: परं ब्रह्माधिगच्छति॥ ६४॥

द्वै विद्ये वेदितव्ये वै इति चाथर्वणी श्रुति:।

परया त्वक्षरप्राप्तिऋग्वेदादिमयापरा। ६५॥

What has been said by Manu, when
appealing to the meaning of the Vedas with
respect to this subject, I will repeat to you.
There are two (forms of) spirit (or god), the
spirit which is the word, and the spirit which is
supreme. He who is thoroughly imbued with
the word of god obtains supreme spirit’. The
Atharva Veda also states that there are two
kinds of knowledge; by the one, which is the
supreme, god is attained; the other is that
which consists of the Rk and other Vedas‘.

यत्तदव्यक्तमजरचिन्त्यमजमव्ययम्।
अनिर्ददेश्यमरूपञ्च पाणिपादाद्यसंयुतम्॥ ६ ६॥
व्याप्तव्याप्तं यत: सर्वं तद् वै पश्यन्ति TET GU

तद् ब्रह्म परमं धाम ag ध्येयं मोक्षकाङ्खिभि:।
श्रुतिवाक्योदितं सूक्ष्मं तद्विष्णो: wet पदम्।। ६८॥

That which is imperceptible, undecaying,

inconceivable, unborn, inexhaustible,
indescribable; which has neither form, nor
hands, nor feet; which is almighty,

omnipresent, eternal; the cause of all things,
and without cause; permeating all, itself
unpenetrated and from which all things
proceed; that is the object which the wise
behold, that is Brahma, that is the supreme
state, that is the subject of contemplation to
those who desire liberation, that is the thing
spoken of by the Vedas, the infinitely subtile,
supreme condition of Visnu.

तदेव भगवद्वाच्यं स्वरूपं परमात्मन:।

वाचको भगवच्छब्दस्तस्याक्षयात्मन:॥६९॥

एवं निगदितार्थस्य तत्तत्त्वं तस्य तत्त्वत:।

ज्ञायते येन तज्ञानं परमन्यत् त्रयीमयम्।७०॥

That essence of the supreme is defined by
the term Bhagavat*: the word Bhagavat is the
denomination of that primeval and eternal god:
and he who fully understands the meaning of
that expression, is possessed of holy wisdom,
the sum and substance of the three Vedas.

अशब्दगोचरस्यापि त्तस्य वै ब्रह्मणो द्विज।
पूजायां भगवच्छब्द: क्रियते ह्यौपचारिक:॥७१॥
शुद्धे महाविभूत्याख्ये ut ब्रह्मणि वर्त्तते।

मैत्रेय! भगवच्छब्द: सर्वकारणकारणे।७२॥
सम्भर्त्तति तथा wal भकारोऽर्थद्वयान्वित:।

नेता गमयिता स्रष्टा गकारार्थस्तथा मुनि॥७३॥

The word Bhagavat is a convenient form to
be used in the adoration of that supreme being,
to whom no term is applicable; and therefore
Bhagavat expresses that supreme spirit, which
is individual, almighty, and the cause of
causes of all things. The letter Bh implies the

cherishes and supporter of the universe. By ga
is understood the leader, impeller, or creator.

ऐश्वर्यस्य समग्रस्य धर्मस्य यशस: श्रिय:।
ज्ञान-वैराग्ययोश्चैव षष्णां भग इतीङ्गना।। ७४॥
