BOOK II, CHAP. 8

195

13, The sacred syllable Om has been already
described (Bk. I. ch. In. I). The Gayatri, or holiest
verse of the Vedas, not to be uttered to ears
profane, is a short prayer to the sun, identified as
the supreme, and occurs in the tenth hymn of the
fourth section of the third Astaka of the Sarhhita of
the Rig-veda : aq सवितुर्वरेण्यं भर्गो देवस्य धीमहि धियो यो
न: प्रचोदयात्। ‘We meditate on that excellent light of
the divine sun: may he illuminate our minds.’ Such
is the fear entertained of profaning this text, that
copyists of the Vedas not infrequently efrain from
transcribing it, both in the Samhita and Bhasya.

14. Or, in the text, with the prayer that
commences with the words Surya, jyotir, ‘That
which is in the sun (or light) is adorable’, &c. The
whole prayer is given in Colebrooke’s account of
the religious ceremonies of the Hindus. As. Res. V.
351.

15, But this comprehends the two Sandhyas,
‘morning and evening twilight.” Two Naris, or half
a Muhirtta before sunrise, constitute the moming
Sandhya; and the same interval after sunset the
evening. Sandhya, meaning ‘junction’, is so termed
as it is the juncture or interval between darkness
and light; as in the Vayu and Matsya: लोकालोकं werd
यस्मात् सूर्य्य: परिभ्रमन् तस्मात्सन्ध्येति तांमाहुरुषव्युष्ट्योस्तयान्तरं।

16. The four months are named in the Vayu and
are, I the Saura, or solarsydereal, consisting of the
sun’s passage through a sign of the Zodiac: 2. the
Saumya or Chandra or lunar month,
comprehending thirty lunations or Tithis, and
reckoned most usually from new moon to new
moon, though sometimes from full moon to full
moon: 3. the Savana or solar month, containing
thirty days of sunrise and sunset: and 4. the Naks
atra or lunar asterismal month, which is the moon’s
revolution, through the twenty-eight lunar
mansions.

17. The five years forming this Yuga, or cycle,
differ only in denomination, being composed of the
months above described, with such Malamasas, or
intercalary months, as may be necessary to
complete the period, according to Vriddha Garga.
The cycle comprehends, therefore, sixty
solarsydereal months of 1800 days; sixty-one solar
months, or 1830 days; sixty-two lunar months, or
1860 lunations; and sixty-seven lunar-asterismal
months, or 1809 such days. Warren, in his Kala
Sankalité, considers these years to be severally

cycles. “in the cycle of sixty’, he observes, “are
contained five cycles of twelve years, each
supposed equal to one year of the planet (Jupiter). I
only mention this cycle because I found it
mentioned in some books; but 1 know of no nation
nor tribe that reckons time after that account. The
names of the five cycles or Yugas are 1.
Samvatsara, 2. Parivatsara, 3. Idvatsara, 4.
Anuvatsara, 5. Udravatsara. The name of each year
is determined from the Ndaksatra, in which
Vrhaspati sets and rises heliacally and they follow
in the order of the lunar months.” K. §. 212. It may
be reasonably doubted, however, if this view be
correct; and the only connexion between the cycle
of five years and that of Vrhaspati may be the
multiplication of the former by the latter (5x12), so
as to form the cycle of sixty years: a cycle based,
the commentator remarks, upon the conjunction
(Yuga) of the sun and moon in every sixtieth year.
The original and properly Indian cycle, however, is
that of five years, as Bentley remarks. “The
astronomers of this period (1181 B.C.) framed a
cycle of tfive years for civil and religious
ceremonies”. Ancient and Modern Hindu
Astronomy. It is in fact, as Colebrooke states, the
cycle of the Vedas, described in the jyotisa, or
astronomical sections, and specified in the institutes
of Parasara as the basis of calculation for larger
cycles. As. Res. VIII. 470.

18. Reference is here made apparently, though
indistincly, to those positions of the planets which
indicate, according to Bentley, the formation of the
lunar mansions by Hindu astronomers about 1424
B.C. Hindu Astronomy, p. 3 and 4. The Vayu and
Linga Puranas specify the positions of the other
planets at the same time, or the end, according to
the former, of the Chaksusa Manvantara. At that
time the sun was in Visakha, the moon in Krittika,
Venus in Pusy4, Jupiter in Pérvaphdiguni, Mars in
Asadha, Budha in Dhanistha, Sani in Revati, Ketu
in Aslesi, and Rahu in Bharani. There arc
differences between some of these and the positions
cited by Bentley, but most of them are the same. He
considers them to have been observations of the
occulations of the moon by the planets, in the
respective lunar mansions, 1424-5 B.C. According
to the Vayu, these positions or origins of the planets
are from the Vedas: समुत्पन्ना इति
स्मृते:। The Linga, less accurately perhaps, reads इति
श्रुत्ति:। referring it to the works of law.
