BOOK V, CHAP. 20

was hung round with garlands: Inquiring of
the warders which bow he was to try, and
being directed to it, he took it, and bent it; but
drawing it with violence, he snapped it in
two,’ and all Mathura resounded with the
noise which its fracture occasioned. Abused by
the warders for breaking the bow, Krsna and
R4ma retorted, and defied them, and left the
hall.

अक्रूरागमवृत्तान्तमुपलभ्य तथा धनु:।

भग्नं श्रुत्वाथ कंसोऽपि wre चाणूर-मुष्टिकौ।॥ १७॥

When Karsa knew that Akrira had
returned, and heard that the bow had been
broken, he thus said to Chantira and Mustika,
his boxers:

HA उवाच
गोपालदारकौ प्राप्तौ भवद्भ्या तौ ममाग्रत:।
मल्लयुद्धेन हन्तव्यौ मम प्राणहरौ fe atu ge
नियुद्धे तद् विनाशेन भवद्भ्या तोषिको ह्यहम्।
दास्याभ्यभिमतान् HPL नान्यथैतन्महाबलौ।। १९॥
न्यायतोऽन्यायतो वापि भवद्भ्या तौ ममाहितौ।
हन्तव्यौ तद्वधाद् राज्यं सामान्यं नो भविष्यति।। २०॥
इत्याज्ञाप्य स at wet तत आहूय हस्तिपम्।
प्रोवाचोच्चैस्त्वया Ase समाजद्वारि कुञ्चर:॥ २१॥
स्थाप्य: कुवलयापीडस्तेन तौ गोपदारकौ।
घातनीयौ नियुद्धाय रङ्गद्दारमुपागतौ॥ २२॥

तमथाज्ञाप्य Fat च मञ्चान् सर्वानुपाकृतान्।
आसन्नमरण: HA: सूर्योदयमुदैक्षत।। २३॥

“Two youths, cowherd boys, have arrived;
you must kill them both, in a trial of,strength,
in my presence; for they practise against my
life. I shall be well pleased if you kill them in
the match, and will give you whatever you
wish; not else. These two foes of mine must be
killed by you fairly or unfairly. The kingdom
shall be ours in common, when they have
perished.’ Having given them these orders, he
sent next for his elephant driver, and desired
him to station his great elephant
Kuvalayapida, who was as vast as a cloud
charged with rain, near the gate of the arena,

467

and drive him upon the two boys when they
should attempt to enter. When Kansa had
issued these commands, and ascertained that
the platforms were all ready for the spectators,
he awaited the rising of the sun, unconscious
of impending death.

Wa: समस्तमञ्चेषु AMT: स तदा जन:।

राजमञ्चेषु चारूढा: सहामात्यैर्म्महीभूत:॥ २४॥

मल्लप्राशिनकवर्गश्च रङ्गमध्यसमीपत:।

कृत: कंसेन कंसोऽपि तुङ्गमञ्चे व्यवस्थित:।। २५॥

अन्त:पुराणां मञ्चाश्च तथान्ये परिकल्पिता:।

अन्ये च वारमुख्यानामन्ये नागरयोषिताम्।। २६॥

नन्दगोपादयो गोपा मञ्चेष्वन्येष्ववस्थिता:।

अक्रूर-वासुदेवौ च मञ्चप्रान्ते व्यवस्थितौ।। २७॥

नागरीयषिता wa देवकी पुत्रगृद्धिनी।

अन्तकालेऽपि पुत्रस्य द्रक्ष्यामि रुचिरं मुखम्॥ २८॥

वाद्यमानेषु तूर्येष चानूरे चापि वल्गति।

हाहाकारपरे लोके ह्यास्फोटयति मुष्टिके।। २९॥

हत्वा Haas हस्स्यारोहप्रणोदितम्।

मदासृगनुलिप्ताङ्गौ गजदन्तवरायुधौ॥ 3 ०॥

मृगमध्ये यथा सिंहौ गर्वलीलाविलोकितौ।

प्रविष्टो सुमहाङ्गं बलभद्र-जनार्द्दनौ।। ३ १॥

In the morning the citizens assembled on
the platforms set apart for them, and the
princes, with the ministers and courtiers,
occupied the royal, seats. Near the centre of
the circle judges of the games were stationed
by Kansa, whilst he himself sat apart close by
upon a lofty throne. Separate platforms were
erected for the ladies of the palace, for the
courtesans, and for the wives of the citizens.’
Nanda and the cowherds had places
appropriated to them, at the end of which sat
Akrira and Vasudeva. Amongst the wives of
the citizens appeared Devaki, mourning for
her son, whose lovely face she longed to
behold even in the hour of his destruction.
When the musical instruments sounded,
Cantra sprang forth, and the people cried,
“Alas I’ and Mustika slapped his arms in
defiance. Covered with must and blood from
