BOOK II, CHAP. 4

173

the Lokaloka mountain, which is ten thousand
Yojanas in breadth, and as many in height; and
beyond it perpetual ‘darkness invests the
mountain all around; which darkness is again
encompassed by the shell of the egg.”

सेयं धात्री विधात्री च सर्वभूतगुणाधिका।
आधारभूता सर्वेषां मैत्रेय! जगतामिति।। ९८॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे चतुर्थोऽध्याय:।

Such, Maitreya, is the earth, which with its
continents, mountains, oceans and exterior
shell, is fifty crores (five hundred millions) of
Yojanas in extent.’ It is the mother and nurse
of all creatures, the fundaton of all worlds, and
the chief of the elements.

NOTES

1. So the commentator explains the terms
Avasarpini and Utsarpini,; अवसर्पिणी हासावस्था- but
these words most commonly designate divisions of
time peculair to the Jainas; during the former of
which men are supposed to decline from extreme
felicity to extreme distress; and in the latter, to
ascend from misery to happiness. The author of the
text had possibly thé Jaina use of these terms in
veiw; and if so, wrote after their system was
promulgated.

2 The Kirma is the only Purdéna in which the
white island, Sveta-Dvipa, the abode of Visnu, is
included in the geography of the world : an
incidental description of it is quoted by Wilford
from the Uttara Khanda of the Padma Purana (As.
Res. XI, 99); and it is in this and in the Brahma
Vaivartta that allusions to it are most frequent and
copious.

3 A slight alteration has been made here in the
order of the description.

4 The description of the Dvipas in the Agni,
Brahma, Kiirma. and Vayu Puranas agrees with that
of our text. The Markandeya, Litga, and Matsya
contain no details. The Bhagavata and Padma
follow the same order as the Visnu, &c. but alter all
the names, and many of the measurements. The
account of the Mahabharata is very irregular and
confused. The variations throw no additional light
upon the geographical system of the Puranas. Some
traces of this appear discoverable in the west; and
the seven Dvipas, with their surrounding seas, may
have some connexion with the notion of the seven

climates, as Wilford has supposed. That learned,
but fanciful writer bestowed great pains upon the
verification of these fictions, and imagined the
different Dvipas to represent actual divisions of the
globe : Jambu being India. Kuga the Kus of
Scripture, or the countries between Mesopotamia
and India: Plaksa being Asia Minor: Salmali,
eastern Europe; Kraufica, Germany : f&kfl, the
British isles; and Pushkara, Iceland. The white or
silver island, or island of the moon, was also,
according to him, the island of Great Britain.
Whatever may be thought of his conclusions, his
essays on these subjects, particularly in the eighth,
tenth, and eleventh volumes of the Asiatic
Researches, contain much curious and interesting
matter.

5 Although the Hindus seem to have had a
notion of the cause of the tides, they were not very
accurate observers of the effect. The extreme rise of
the tide ia the Hugli river has never exceeded
twenty feet. and its average is about fifteen, (As.
Res. vol. XVUL Kyd on the Tides of the Hugli.)

6 The Anda Kataha (अण्डकराह:) The Kataha is
properly a shallow hemispherical vessel, a saucer;
but compounded in this form, implies the shell of
the mundane egg. The Bhagavata thus describes
these portions of the world : "Beyond the sea of
fresh water is the mountain belt, called Lokaloka.
the circular boundary between the world and void
space. The interval between Meru and Manasottara
is the land of living beings. Beyond the fresh water
sea is the region of gold. which shines like the
bright surface of a mirror, but from which no
sensible object presented to it is ever reflected, and
consequently it is avoided by living creatures. The
mountain range by which it is encircled is termed
Lokdloka. because the world is separated by it from
that which is not world (लोकालोक इति समाख्यातो
यदनेनाचलेन लोकोऽलोकश्चान्तर्वर्तिना व्यवस्थाप्यते); for which
purpose it was placed by Iswara on the limit of the
three worlds; and its height and breadth are such
that the rays of the heavenly luminaries, from the
sun to the polar-star, which spread over the regions
within the mountain, cannot penetrate beyond it.”
According to Wilford. however, there is a chasm in
the belt. and a sea beyond it, where Visnu abides:
but he has not given his authorities for this. (As.
Res. XI. 14.) The Mohammedan legends of Koh
Kaf, the stony girdle that surrounds the world.’ are
