BOOK IV, 6

337

nymphs, genii and quipsters, found heaven
itself but dull while Urvasi was away.
Knowing the agreement that Urvasi had made
with the king, Visavasu was appointed by the
Gandharvas to effect its violation; and he,
coming by night to the chamber where they
slept, carried off one of the rams. Urvasi was
awakened by its cries and exclaimed. "Ah me!
Who has stolen one of my children? Had I a
husband, this would not have happened! To
whom shall I apply for aid?" The Raja
overheard her lamentation, but recollecting
that he was undressed and that Urvasi might
see him in that state, did not move from the
couch. Then the Gandharvas came and stole
the other ram; and Urvasi hearing it bleat,
cried out that a woman had no protector who
was the bride of a prince so dastardly as to
submit to this outrage. This incensed
Purtiravas highly and trusting that the nymph
would not see his person, as it was dark, he
rose and took his sword and pursued the
robbers, calling upon them to stop and receive
their punishment. At that moment the
Gandharvas caused a flash of brilliant
lightning to play upon the chamber and Urvasi
beheld the king undressed : the compact was
violated an the nymph immediately
disappeared.

इत्येवमुक्तास्ता अप्सरस ऊचु:-साधु Wy अस्य रूपम्,
अनेन सहास्माकमपि सर्वकालमभिरन्तुं स्पृहा
भवेदिति॥ ३५॥

The Gandharvas, abandoning the rams,
departed to the region of the gods. Having
recovered the animals, the king returned
delighted to his couch, but there he beheld no
Urvasi; and not finding her anywhere, he
wandered naked over the world, like on
insane. At length coming to Kuruksetra, he
saw Urvasi sporting with four other nymphs of
heaven in a lake beautified with lotuses and he
ran to her and called her his wife and wildly
implored her to return. "Mighty monarch,"
said the nymph, "refrain from this
extravagance. I am now pregnant : depart at
present and come hither again at the end of a
year, when IJ will deliver to you a son and
remain with you for one night.” Purtravas,
thus comforted, returned to his capital. Urvasi
said to her companions, "This prince is a most
excellent mortal : I lived with him long and
affectionately united." "It was well done of
you," they replied; "he is indeed of comely
appearance and one with whom we could live
happily forever."

अब्दे च Wi स राजा तत्राजगाम कुमारञ्चायुषमस्मै

तदोर्वशी ददौ, एकाञ्च निशां तेन राज्ञा सहोषित्वा पञ्चपुत्रोत्

परित्यज्य तावुरणकौ weal: सुरलोकमुपागता:। राजापि पत्तये गर्भमाप।। ३ ६॥
at मेषावादाय हृष्टमना: स्वशयनमायातो नोर्वशीं उवाच चैनं राजानम्-अस्मत् प्रीत्या महाराजाय wd एव

ददर्श।। ३ २॥

गन्धर्वा वरदा: संव्रत्ता:, Tene faaat at इति॥ ३७॥

ताञ्चापश्यन्नपगताम्बर एवोन्मत्तरूपो aN, FRAT आह राजा त विजित-सकलारातिरहतेन्द्रियसामर्थ्य

चाम्भोजसरसि अन्याभिश्चतसृभिरप्सरोभि: समवेतामुर्व्वशीं बन्धुमानमितबलकोष:, नान्यदस्माकमुर्व्वशीसालोक्याद्
ददर्श। ततश्चोन्मत्तरूपो राजा जायेह fis, मनसि, GR अप्राप्यमस्ति, तदहमनया सहोर्व्वश्या कालं
वचसि, इत्यनेकप्रकारं सूक्तमवोचत्॥ ३ ३॥ नेतुमभिलषामि।। ३ ८॥

आह चोर्व्वशी-महाराज अलमनेनाविवेकचेष्टितेन इत्युक्ते गन्धर्वा राज्ञेऽग्निस्थालीं ददु:।।३९॥

येन अहमेतावन्तं इत्युक्तस्तामग्निस्थालीमादायाजगाम,
कालमनुरागाकृष्टमनसा सहोषिता॥३४॥
