34

THE VISNU-PURANAM

first born of all + ऋभु: सनत्कुमारश्च द्वावेतावूर्ध्वरेतसौ।
पूर्वोत्पन्नौ...सर्वेषामपि पूर्वजौ। whilst the text of the Hari
Varhga limits the primogeniture to Sanat-kumara ;
सनत्कुमारं च विभुं पूर्वेषामपि पूर्वजं। In another place,
however, it enumerates apparently six. or the above
four with Sana and either Rbhu or another
Sanatana; for the passage is-corrupt. The French
translation scribes a share in creation to
Sanatkumara : 'Les sept Prajapatis, Raudra, Scanda,
et Sanatkaumala, se mirent a produire les etres
repandant partout l'inepuisable energic de dieu.’
The original is, सप्तैते जनयन्ति स्म प्रजा रुद्रश्च भारत। स्कन्द:
सनत्कुमारश्च तेज: संक्षिप्य तिष्ठत:। Sanksipya is not
‘repandant.' but ‘restraining . and Tisthatah being in
the dual number, relates of course to only two of
the serics. The correct rendering is. These seven
(Prajapatis) created progcncy. and so did Rudra;
but Skanda and Sanatkum§ra. restraining their
powcr, abstained (from creation).’ So the
commentator : सृष्टिसामर्थ्य dra निगृह्य सृष्टिमकुर्व्वन्तामेव
तिष्ठत:। These sages, however, live as long as
Brahma, and they are only crcated by him in the
first Kalpa, although their generation is very
commonly, but inconsistently, introduced in the
Varaha or Padma Kalpas. This creation, says the
text, is both primary (Prakrta) and secondary
(Vaikrta). It is the latter, according to the
commentator, as regards the origin of these saints
from Brahmé ; it is the former as affects Rudra.
who, though proceeding from Brahma, in a certain
form was in essence equally an immediate
production of the first principle. These notions, the
birth of Rudra and the saints, seem to have been
borrowed from the Saivas, and to have been
awkwardly engrafted upon the Vaisnava system.
Sanatkumara and his brethren are always described
in the Saiva Puranas as Yogis : as the Karma, after
enumerating them, adds, पंचैते योगिनो fam: परं
`वैराग्यमाश्रिता:। These five, oh Brahmanas, were Yogis,
who acquired entire exemption from passion :' and
the Hari Varmsa, although rather Vaisnava than
Saiva, observes, that the Yogis celebrate these six,
along with Kapila, in Yoga works: ब्रह्माणं कपिलं चैव
षडेतांश्च योगिन:। यतयो योगतन्त्रेषु स्तुवन्ति fe द्विजातय:। The
idea seems to have been amplified also in the Saiva
works; for the Linga Purana describes the repeated
birth of Siva. or Vamadeva. as a Kumara, or boy,
from Brahma, in each Kalpa, who again becomes
four. Thus in the twenty-ninth Kalpa Swetalohita is

the Kumara, and he becomes Sananda, Nandana.
Visvananda. Upananda; all of a white complexion:
in the thirtieth the Kumara becomes Virajas,
Vivahu. Visoka, Visvabhavana; all of a red colour :
in the thirty-first he becomes four youths of a
yellow colour : and in the thirty-second the four
Kumaras were black. All these are no doubt,
comparatively recent additions to the original
notion of the birth of Rudra and the Kuméaras; itself
obviously a sectarial innovation opon the primitive
doctrine of the birth of the Prajapatis. or will-born
sons of Brahma.

14. These reiterated, and not always very
congruous accounts of the creation are explained by
the Puranas as referring to different Kalpas, or
renovations of the world, and therefore involving
no incompatibility, A better reason for their
appcarance is the probability that they have been
borrowed from different original authorities. The
account that follows is evidently modified by the
Yogi Saivas. by its gencral mysticism, and by the
expressions with which it begins: ततो @argr-

चतुष्टयं। सिसृक्षुरम्भांस्येतानि स्वमात्मानमयूयुजत्।
‘Collecting his mind into itself, मनो समाधत्ते।
according to the comment, is the performance of
the Yoga (Yiyuje). The term Ambhansi, lit.
‘waters.’ for the four orders of beings, gods.
demons, men, and Pitrs. is also a peculiar, and
probably mystic term. The. commentator says it
occurs in the Vedas as a synonym of gods, etc.:
एतानि चत्वार्य्यश्भांसि ta मनुष्या: पितरोऽसुरा इति श्रुते;। The
Vayu Purana derives it from ‘to shine.’ because the
different orders of beings shine or flourish severally
by moonlight, night, day, and twilight: ८1९ .भान्ति
यस्मात्ततोऽम्भांसि। etc.

15. This account is given in several other
Puranas : in the Kirma with more simplicity; in the
Padma. Linga, and Vayu with more detail. The
Bhagavata, as usual, amplifies still more copiously,
and mixes up much absurdity with the account.
Thus the person of Sandhyd, ‘evening twilight.’ is
thus described: “She appeared with eyes rolling
with passion, whilst her lotus-like feet sounded
with tinkling ornaments: a muslin vest depended
from her waist, secured by a golden zone: her
breasts were protuberant, and close together; her
nose was elegant: her tongue beautiful; her face
was bright with smiles, and she modestly concealed
it with the skirts of her robe; whilst the dark curls
