BOOK I, CHAP. 15

93

the sovereign of the vegetable world, beheld
all cxcept a few of the trees ‘destroyed, he
went to the patriarchs, the Pracetasas, and said,
“Restrain your indignation, princes, and listen
to me. I will form an alliance between you and
the trees. Prescient of futurity, I have
nourished with my rays this precious maiden,
the daughter of the woods. She is called
Maris, and is assuredly the offspring of the
trees. She shall be your bride. and the
multiplier of the race of Dhruva. From a
portion of your lustre and a portion of mine,
oh mighty sages, the patriarch Daksa shall be
born or her, who, endowed with a part of me,
and composed of your vigour, shall be as
resplendent as fire, and shall multiply the
human race.

कण्डुर्नाम मुनि: पूर्वमासीद् वेदविदां वर:।
सुरम्ये गोमतीतीरे स तेपे परमं TT ११॥
तत्क्षोभाय सुरेन्देण प्रम्लोचाख्या वराप्सरा।
प्रयुक्ता क्षोभयामास तमृषिं सा शुचिस्मिता।। १२॥
क्षोभिन: स तया सार्द्ध वर्षाणामधिकं शतम्।
अतिष्ठन्मन्दरद्रोण्यां विषयासक्तमानस:।। १३॥
सा त्वं प्राह महात्मानं गन्तुमिच्छाम्यहं दिवम्।
प्रसादसुमुखो Tar अनुज्ञां दातुमर्हसि।। १४॥
तयैवमुक्त: स मुनिस्तस्यामासक्तमानस:।
दिनानि कतिंचिद् भद्रे स्थीयतामित्यभाषत।। १५॥
एवमुक्ता ततस्तेन साग्रं वर्षशतं पुन:।

aye विषयांस्तन्वी तेन arg महात्मना।। १६॥
saat देहि भगवन् व्रजामि त्रिदिवालयम्।
उक्तस्तथेति स मुनि: स्थीयतामित्यभाषत।। १७॥
पुनर्गते वर्षशते साधिके सा शुभानना।
यामीत्याह दिवं ब्रह्मन् प्रणयस्मितशोभनम्।। १८॥
उक्तस्तयैव स मुनिरुपगुह्यायतेक्षणाम्।
प्राहास्यतां क्षणं सुभ्रु चिरं कालं गमिष्यसि।। १९॥
तच्छापभीता शुश्रोणी we तेनषिणा पुन:।
vitae किञ्चिदूनं वर्षाणामन्वतिष्ठत्त।। २०॥
गमनाय महाभागो देवराजनिवेशनम्।

प्रोक्त: प्रोक्तस्तया तन्व्या स्थीयतामित्यभाषत।। २१

तं सा शापभयादू भीता दाक्षिण्येण च दक्षिणा।
Shear प्रणयभङ्गार्ति वेदनी न जहौ मुनिम्॥ २२॥
तया च रमतस्तस्य महर्षेस्तदहर्निशम्।

नवं नवमभूत् प्रेम मन्मथाविष्टचेतस:।। २३॥

There was formerly (said Soma) a sage
named Kandu, eminent in holy wisdom, who
practised pious austerities on the lovely
borders of the Gomati river. The king of the
gods sent the nymph Pramlochi to disturb his
penance, and the sweet-smiling damsel
diverted the sage from his devotions. They
lived together, in the valley or Mandara, for a
hundred and fifty yean; during which, the
mind of the Muni was wholly given up to
enjoyment. At the expiration of this period the
nymph requested his permission to return to
heaven; but the Muni, still fondly attached to
her, prevailed upon her to remain for some
time longer; and the graceful damsel continued
to reside for another hundred years, and
delight the great sage by her fascinations.
Then again she preferred her suit to be allowed
to return to the abodes of the gods; and again
the Muni desired her to remain. At the
expiration of more than a century the nymph
once more said to him, with a smiling
countenance, ‘Brahman. I depart;' but the
Muni, detaining the finoe-eyed damsel,
replied, ‘Nay. stay yet a little; you will go
hence for a long period.’ Afraid of incurring an
imprecation, the graceful nymph continued
with the sage for nearly cwo hundred years
more, repeatedly asking his permission to go
to the region of thc king of the gods, but as
often desired by him to remain. Dreading to be
cursed by him, and excelling in amiable
manners,- well knowing also the pain that is
inflicted by separation from an object of
affection, she did not quit the Mani, whose
mind, wholly subdued by love, became every
day more strongly attached to her.

`एकदा तु त्वरायुक्तो निश्चक्रामोटजान्मुनि:।
निष्कामन्तञ्च कृत्रेति गम्यते प्राह सा शुभा।। २४॥
इत्युक्त: स तया we परिव्रृतमह: शुभे।
