BOOK II, CHAP. 13

CHAPTER 13

त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:
(जडभरतोपाख्यानं, सौवीरं राजानं प्रति भरतस्य
तत्त्वोषदेशश्च)
sea उवाच

भगवन्।! सम्यगाख्यातं यत् पृष्टोऽसि मयाखिलम्।
भूसमुद्रादिसरितां संस्थानं ग्रहसंस्थितिम्।। १॥
विष्ण्वाधारं तथा चैतत् त्रैलोक्यं समवस्थितम्।
परमार्थस्तु तेनोक्तो यथाज्ञानं प्रधानत:।। २॥
यत्त्वेतद्भगवानाह भरतस्य महीपते:।
कथयिष्यामि चरितं तन्ममाख्यातुमर्हसि।। ३॥
भरत: स महीपाल: शालग्रामेऽवसत् किल।
योगयुक्त: समाधाय वासुदेवे सदा मन:।४॥
पुण्यदेशप्रभावेण ध्यायतश्च सदा हरिम्।
कथन्तु नाभवन्मुक्तिर्यदभूत् स द्विज: पुन:।॥५॥
famed च a तेन यद्भूय: सुमहात्मना।
भरतेन मुनिश्रेष्ठ! aad wad वक्तुमर्हसि।। ६॥

Maitreya said—Reverned sir,’ all that I
asked of you has been thoroughly explained;
namely, the situation of the earth, oceans,
mountains, rivers, and planetary bodies; the
system of the three worlds, of which Visnu is
the stay. The great end of life has also been
expounded by you, and the pre-eminence of
holy knowledge. It now remains that you fulfil
the promise you made some time since,’ of
relating to me the story of king Bharata, and
how it happened that a monarch like him,
residing constantly at the sacred place
Salagrama, and engaged in devotion, with his
mind ever applied to Vasudeva, should have
failed, through the sanctity of the shrine, and
the efficacy of his abstractions, to obtain final
emancipation; how it was that he was born
again as a Brahmana; and what was done by
the magnanimous Bharata in that capacity : all
this it is fit that you inform me.

पराशर उवाच
शालग्रामे महाभागो भगवन्न्यस्तमानस:।

207

स sare fat कालं मैत्रेय! पृथिवीपति:॥७॥
अवाप परमां काष्ठां मनसश्चापि संयमे।। cit
यज्ञेशाच्युत गोविन्द माधवानन्त sera!

कृष्ण विष्णो हृषीकेशेत्याह राजा स केवलम्॥९॥
नान्यज्जगाद मैत्रेय! किञ्चित् स्वप्नान्तरेऽपि a
एतत्परं तदर्थञ्च feat नान्यदचिन्तयत्। १०॥
समित्-पुष्प-कुशादानं चक्रे देवक्रियाकृते।

नान्यानि चक्रे करम्माणि नि:सङ्गो योगतापस:।॥ ११॥

Parasara said—The illustrious monarch of
the earth resided, Maitreya, for a considerable
period at Salagrama, his thoughts being
wholly dedicated to god, and his conduct
distinguished by kindness and every virtue,
until he had effccted, in the highest degree, the
entire control over his mind. The Raja was
ever repeating the names, Yajnesa, Achyuta,
Govinda, Madhava, Ananta, KeSava, Krsna,
Visnu, Hrshikesa; nothing else did he uttcr,
even in his dreams; nor upon anything but
those names, and their import, did he cver
meditate. He accepted fuel, flowers, and holy
grass, for the worship of the deity, but
performed no other religious rites, being
engrossed by disinterested, abstract devotion.

जगामं सोऽभिषेकार्थमेकदा तु महानदीम्।

सस्नौ तत्र तदा चक्रे स्नानस्यानन्तरक्रिया:। १२॥
आसन्नप्रसवा Teta हरिणी वनात्॥ १३॥
तत: समभवत्तत्र पीतप्राये चले तया।

सिंहस्य We: सुमहान् सर्वप्राणिभयङ्कर:।॥ १४॥
Wa: सा सहसा त्रासादाप्लुता निम्नगातटम्।

On one occasion he went to the Mah4nadi,’
for the purpose of ablution : he bathed there,
and performed the ceremonies usual aftcr
bathing. Whilst thus occupied, there came to
the same place a doe big with young, who had
come out of the forest to drink of the stream.
Whilst quenching her thirst, there was heard
on a sudden the loud and fearful roaring of a
lion; on which the doe, being excessively
