102

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Prahlada. looking on all things with
indifference, devoted his whole faith to
Janarddana. The flmes that were lighted by the
king of the Daityas consumed not him, in
whosc heart Vasudeva was cherished; and all
the earth trembled when, bound with bonds, he
moved amidst the waters of the ocean.

न fad विविधै: शस्तनैर्यस्य दैत्येन्द्रपातितै:।
शरीरमद्रिकठिनं सर्वत्राच्युतचेतस:।॥ १४६॥
विषानलोज्ज्वलमुखा यस्य दैत्यप्रचोदिता:।

नान्ताय सर्पपतयो बभूवुरुरुतेजस:॥ १४७॥
शैलैराक्रान्तदेहोऽपि य: स्मरम् पुरुषोत्तमम्।

तत्याज नात्मन: प्राणान् विष्णुस्मरणदंशित:॥ १४८॥
पतन्तमुच्चादवनिर्यमुपेत्य महामतिम्।

दधार देत्यपतिना fart स्वर्गनिवासिना।॥ १४९॥

His firm body, fortified by a mind
engrossed by Acyuta. was unwounded by the
weapons hurled on him by order of the Daitya
monarch; and the serpents sent to destory him
breathed their venomous flames upon him in
vain. Overwhelmed with rocks, he yet
remained unhurt, for he never forgot Visnu,
and the recollection of the deity was his
armour of proof. Hurled from on high by the
king of the Daityas, residing in Svarga, earth
received him unharmed.

यस्य संशोषको वायुर्देहे दैत्येन्द्रयोजित:।

अवाप संक्षयं सद्यश्चित्तस्थे मधुसूदने।। १५ ol
विषाणभङ्गमुन्मत्ता मदहानिञ्च दिग्गजा:।

यस्य वक्षस्थले MAT दैत्येन्द्रपरिणामिता:।। १५ १॥
यस्य चोत्पादिता Heart दैत्यराजपुरोहितै:।

बभूव नान्ताय पुरा गोविन्दासक्तचेतस:॥ १५ २॥
शम्बरस्य च मायानां सहस्रमतिमायिन:।

यस्मिन् प्रयुक्तं चक्रेण कृष्णस्य वितथीकृतम्॥ १५ ३॥
दैत्येन्द्रसूदोपहृतं यस्तु हालाहलं विषम्।
जारयामास मनिमानविकारममत्सरी॥ १५ VII
समचेता जगत्यस्मिन् य: सर्वेष्वेव जन्तुषु।
यथात्मनि तथान्यत्र परं मैत्रगुणान्वित:॥ १५५॥
धर्मात्मा सत्यशौचादिगुणानामाकरस्तथा।

उपमानमशेषाणां साधूनां य: सदाभवत्।। १५ ६॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:।

The wind sent into his body to wither him
up was itself annihilated by him, in whom
Madhustidana was present. ‘The fierce
elephants of the spheres broke their tusks, and
vailed their pride, against the firm breast
which the lord of the Daityas had ordered
them to assault. The ministrant priests of the
monarch were baffled in all their ritcs for the
destruction of one so steadily attached to
Govinda: and the thousand delusions of the
fraudulent Samvara, counteracted by the
discus of Krsna, were practised without
success. The deadly poison administered by
his father's officers he partook of
unhesitatingly, and without its working any
visible change; for he looked upon the world
with mind undisturbed, and. full of benignity,
regarded all things with equal affection, and as
identical with himself. He was righteous; an
inexhaustible mine of purity and truth; and an
unfailing model for all pious men.

NOTES

1. Or. ‘immersed in the six trmis’ (@fAtvem);
explained hunger thirst, sorrow, stupefaction,
decay, and death.

2. There is some confusion here in regard to the
person addressed but the context shows that the
insertion of Maitreya's name is an inadvertence,
and that the passage is a continuation of Soma's
speech to the Pracetasas.

3. The phrase is ब्रह्मपारमय जपं। ‘made up of the
farther boundary of Brahma;' implying either
‘comprehending the supreme, or Brahma, and
transcendental wisdom; Para;’ or. ‘consisting of the
farthest limits (Para) or truths of the Vedas or
Brahma;’ that is, being the essence of the Vedanta
philosophy. The hymn that follows is in fact a
mantra or mystical prayer, commencing with the
reiteration of the word Para and Para’; as विष्णुरपारपार:
परम्परेभ्य: परमार्थरूपी। स ब्रह्मपार: परपारभूत: पर: पराणामपि
पारपार:। Para means Supreme, infinite;' and Para.
‘the.-farther bank or limit,’ the point that is to be
attained by crossing a river or sea. or figurtively the
world or existence. Visnu, then, is Para, that which
