BOOK I, CHAP. 7

43

NOTES

1. It is not clear which of the previous narratives
is here referred to, but it seems most probable that
the account in Ch. V. is intended.

2. Considerable variety prevails in this list of
Prajapatis, | Brahmd-putras. Brahmanas, or
Brahméarshis; but the variations are of the nature of
additions made to an apparently original
enumeration of but seven, whose namcs generally
recur. Thus in the Mahabharata,’ Moksa Dharma,
we have in one place, Marici. Atri, Angiras.
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu. and Vasistha, ब्रह्मण: Wa वै
पुत्रा महात्मान: स्वयम्भुव:। 'the seven highminded sons of
the self-born Brahma,’ In another place of the
same, however, we have Daksa substituted for
Vasistha: ब्रह्मानुससृजे YA मानसान् दक्षसप्तमान्।
`मरीचिमत्र्यङ्गिरसं पुलस्त्यं Yas क्रतुं। ‘Brahma then created
mind-begotten sons, of whom Daksa was the
seventh, with Marici,' etc. These seven sons of
Brahma are also identified with the seven Rsis: as
in the Vayu; भूय: सप्तर्षयस्त्वेव उत्पन्ना AA मानसा:। पुत्रत्वे
कल्पिताश्चैव स्वयमेव स्व्रयम्भुव:। although, with palpable
inconsistency, eight are immediately enumerated,
or, Bhrgu, Marici. Atri, Anigiras, Pulastya, Pulaha.
Kratu, and Vasistha. The Uttara Khanda of the
Padma Purana substitutes Kardama for Vasistha.
The Bhagavata includes Daksa, enumerating nine.
The Maisya agrees with Manu in adding Narada to
the list of our text. The Kiirma Purana adds Dharma
and Sankalpa. The Liga. Brahmanda, and Vayu
Purana also add them, and extend the list to
Adharma and Ruci. The Hari Varnga in one place
inserts Gautama, and in another Manu. Altogether
therefore we have seventeen, instead of seven, But
the accounts given of the origin of several of these,
show that they were not originally included
amongst the Manasa putras, or sons of Brahma's
mind; for even Daksa, who finds a place in all the
lists except one of those given in the Mahabharata,
is uniformly said to have sprung from Brahma's
thumb: and the same patriarch, as well as Dharma,
is included in some accounts. as in the Bhagavata
and Matsya Purana, amongst a different series of
Brahma’s progeny, or virtues and vices: or, Daksa
(dexterity), Dharma (virtue). Kama (desire).
Krodha (passion). Lobha (covetousness). Moha
(infatuation), Mada (insanity), Pramoda (pleasure),
Mrtyu (death). and Angaja (lust). These are
severally derived from different parts of Brahma’s

body: and the Bhagavata adding Kardama (soil or
sin) to this enumeration, makes him spring from
Brahma's shadow. The simple statement, that the
first Prajapatis sprang from the mind or will of
Brahma, has not contented the depraved taste of the
mystics, and in some of the Puranas, as the
Bhagavata. Linga, and Vayu, they also are derived
from the body of their progenitor : or, Bhrgu from
his skin, Marici from his mind. Atri from his eyes,
Angiras from his mouth. Pulastya from his ear;
Pulaha from his navel. Kratu from his hand,
Vasistha from his breath, Daksa from his thumb,
and Narada from his hip. They do not exactly
agree, however, in the places whence these beings
proceed; as for instance, according to the Linga,
Marici springs from Brahm's eyes. not Atri, who
there proceeds, instead of Pulastya, from his ears.
The Vayu has also another account of their origin,
and states them to have sprung from the fires of a
sacrifice offered by Brahma; an allegorical mode of
expressing, their probable origin, considering them
to be in some degree real persons, from the
Brahmanical rial, of which they were the first
institutors and observers. The Vayu Purana also
states, that besides the seven primitive Rsis, the
Prajapatis are numerous, and specifies Kardama.
Kasyapa, Sesha, Vikranta. Susravas,: Bahuputra,
Kumara, Vivasvat. Sucisravas. Prachetasa (Daks
a), Aristanemi, Babula. These and many others
were Prajapatis: इत्येवमादयोऽन्येऽपि बहवश्च प्रजेश्वरा:। In the
beginning of the Mahabharata (A P.) we have again
a different origin, and first Daksa, the son of
Pracetasas, it is said. had seven sons, after whom
the twenty-one Prajapatis were born, or appeared.
According to the commenfator. seven sons of Daks
a were the allegorical persona Krodha, Tamas,
Dama, Vikrta, Angiras. Kardama, and Asva; and
the twenty-one Prajapatis, the seven usually
specified Marichi and the rest, and the fourteen
Manus. This looks like a blending of the earlier and
later notions.

3. Besides this general notice of the origin of
Rudra and his separate forms, we have in the next
chapter an entirely different set of beings so
denominated; and the eleven alluded to in the text
are also more particularly enumerated in a
subsequent chapter. The origin of Rudra, as one of
the agents in creation, is described in most of the
Puranas, The Mahabharata, indeed, refers his origin
