३94

After these, various races will reign, as
seven Abhiras, ten Garddhabas, sixteen Sakas,
eight Yavanas, fourteen Tusdras, thirteen
Mundas, eleven Maunas, altogether seventy-
nine princes,“ who will be sovereigns of the
earth for one thousand three hundred and
ninety years; and then eleven Pauras will be
kings for threc hundred years.® When they are
destroyed, the Kailakila Yavanas will be
kings; the chief of whom will be
Vindhyasakti; his son will be Parafijaya; his
son will be Rdmacandra; his son will be
Adharma, from whom will be Varanga,
Krtanandana, Sudhinandi, Nandiyagas, Siguka
and Pravira; these will rule for a hundred and
six years.” From them will proceed thirteen
sons; then three B&ahlikas and Puspamitra,
Patumitra and others, to the number of
thirteen, will rule over Mekala.” There will be
nine kings in the seven KoSalas; and there will
be as many Naisadha princes.™

मथुरायामनगङ्गाप्रयागं मागधा गुप्ताश्च भोक्षयन्ति। कोशलोडइ
(gegen) ताम्रलिप्तान् समुद्रतटपुरीश्च देवरक्षितो रक्षिष्यति।
कालतोयान् जनपदान् मणिधारवंशा भोक्ष्यन्ति। स्तरीराज्य-
(रैराज्य)१ मूषिकजनपदान् कनकाह्वया भोक्ष्यन्ति।

श्च व्रात्या द्विजाभीरशूद्राद्या
भोक्ष्यन्ति।

व्रात्या म्लेच्छादय: शूद्रा: भोक्ष्यन्ति।

In Magadha a sovereign named Visvasphat
ika will establish other tribes; he will extirpate
the Ksatriya or martial race and elevate
fishermen, barbarians and Brahmanas and
other castes, to power.” The nine Nagas will
reign in Padmavati, Kantipuri and Mathura;
and the Guptas of Magadha along the Ganges
to Prayaga.’”” A prince named Devaraksita will
reign, in a city on the sea-shore, over the
Kogalas, Odras, Pundras and Tamraliptas.”
The Guhas will possess Kalinga, Mahihaka

THE VISNU-PURANAM

and the mountains of Mahendra.” The race of
Manidhanu will occupy the countries of the
Nisadas, Naimisikas and Kalatoyas.” The
people called Kanaks will possess the Amazon
country and that called Miusika. ™ Men of the
three tribes, but degraded and Abhiras and
Sadras, will occupy Saurastra, Avanti, Sura,
Arbuda and Marubhiimi and Stdras, outcastes
and barbarians will be mastcrs of the banks of
the Indus, Darvika, the Candrabhigd and
Kashmir.”

एते च तुल्यकाला: wa पृथिव्यां भूभृतो भविष्यन्ति।
अल्पप्रासादा बृहत्कोपा: सर्वकालमनृताधर्मरुचय: स्त्री-
उदितास्तमितप्राया: स्वल्पायुषो महेच्छा अत्यल्पधर्माश्च
भविष्यन्ति ॥ १८॥

These will all be contemporary monarchs,
reigning over the earth; kings of churlish
spirit, violent, temper and ever addicted to
falsehood and wickedness. They will inflict
death on women, children and cows; they will
seize upon the property of their subjects; they
will be of limited power and will for the most
part rapidly rise and fall; their lives will be
short, their desires insatiable and they will
display but little piety.

a3 विमिश्रा जनपदास्तच्छीलवर्तिनो राजाश्रयशुष्मिणो
म्लेच्छाश्चार्याश्च विपर्ययेण वर्त्तमान: प्रजा:

क्षपयिष्यन्ति।। १९॥

The people of the various countries

सिन्धुतटदार्वीकोर्वी-चन्द्रभाग-काश्मीरविषयान् intermingling with them will follow their

example and the barbarians being powerful in
the patronage of the princes, whilst purer
tribes are neglected, the people will perish.”

ततश्चानुदिनमल्पाल्पह्नासाद् व्यवच्छेदाद् धमार्थयोर्जगत:
Paar भविष्यति।।-२०॥
ततश्चार्थएवाभिजनहेतु॰घनपेवाशेषधर्पहेतु अभिरुचिरेव
सम्बन्धहेतु:)। अनृतमेव व्यावहारजयहेतु:,
स्रीत्व’पेवोफ्भॊगहेनु रत्मताम्रभागितैव पृथिवीहेतु:,
ब्रह्मसूत्रमेव विप्रत्वहेतु:) लिङ्गधारणमेवाश्रमहेतु:, अन्याय
We वृत्तिहेतु:॥। २१-२२॥
