64

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Parasara proceeded—- Thus, Maitreya, in
former times the goddess Sri conferred these
boons upon the king of the gods. being pleased
by his adorations; but her first birth was as the
daughter of Bhrgu by Khydati: it was at a
subsequent period that she was produced from
the sea, at the churning of the ocean by the
demons and the gods. to obtain ambrosia.” For
in like manner as the lord of the world, the god
of gods. Janardana, descends amongst
mankind (in various shapes), so does his
coadjutrix Sri. Thus when Hari was born as a
dwarf, the son of Aditi. Laksmi appeared from
a lotus (as Padma or Kamala); when he was
born as Rama. of the race of Bhrgu (or
Parasurama). she was Dharani; when he was
Raghava (Ramacandra), she was Sita; and
when he was Krsna, she became Rukmini.

अन्येषु चावतारेषु विष्णोरेषा सहायिनी।। ex 2
देवत्वे देवदेहेयं मनुष्यत्वे च मानुषी।

विष्णोर्देहानुरूपां वै करोत्येषात्मनस्तनुम्॥ १४३॥
यश्चैतच्छृणुयाज्जन्म लक्ष्म्या यश्च पठेन्नर:।

fart न विच्युतिस्तस्य गृहे यावत् कुलत्रयम्।। १४४॥
ward ay चैवैष yey श्रीस्तवो मुने।

अलक्ष्मी: कलहाधारा न तेष्वास्ते कदाचन।। १४५॥

In the other descents of Visnu, she is his
associate. If he takes a celestial form. she
appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a
mortal too. transforming her own person
agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vis
nu to put on. Whosoever hears this account of
the birth of Laksmi, whosoever reads it. shall
never lose the goddess Fortune from his
dwelling for three generations; and misfortune,
the fountain of strife, shall never enter into

those houses in which the hymns to Sri are
repeated.

एतत् ते कथितं ब्रह्मन् यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि।
क्षीराब्धौ श्रीर्यथा जाता पूर्वं भृगुसुता सती॥ १४६॥
स्तुतिनियमिन्द्रमुखोद्गता fe cera: |
अनुदिनमिह पठ्यते नृभिर्यै
र्वसति न तेषु कदाचिदप्यलक्ष्मी:।। १४७॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे नवमोऽध्याय:।

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to you. in
answer to your question, how Laksmi.
formerly the daughter of Bhrgu, sprang from
the sea of milk; find misfortune shall never
visit those amongst mankind who daily recite
the praises of Laksmi uttered by Indra. which
are the origin and cause of all prosperity.

tek

NOTES

1. Durvasas was the son of Atri by Anasilya, and
was an incarnation of a portion of Siva.

2. A Vidyadhari. These beings, male and female,
are spirits of an inferior order, tenanting the middle
regions of the atmosphere. According to the Vayu,
the garland was given to the nymph by Devi.

3. He observed the Vrata, or vow of intanily;
उन्मत्तन्नतभृत्। equivalent to the ecstasies of some
religious fanatics, ‘In this state.” says the com-
mentator. ‘even Saints are devils :` योगिनो fe व्रतोन्मत्ता:
पिशाचा इव वर्त्तन्ते।

4. They became Nih-satwa; and Satwa is
explained throughout by Dhairyya, steadness,
‘fortitude.'

5. The first effect of primary cause is nature, or
Prakrti ; the effect of the effect, or of Prakrti, is
Mahat : effect in the third degree is Aharikara: in
the fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahamkara) of
the the effect (Mahat) of the effect (Prakrti), is
elementary substance, or Bhiita. Visnu is each and
all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahma is
the cause of mortal life : the cause of Brahma is the
egg, or aggregate elementary matter : its cause is,
therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which is
subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from
Aharnkara. and so on. Visnu is also each and all of
these.

6. With your Sakti. or the goddess Sri or Laksmi.

7. Or with the Sikta, or hymn of the Vedas.
commencing. “Hiranyu varnam." etc.

8. The churning of the ocean does not occur in
several of the Puranas, and is but cursorily alluded
to in the Siva, Linga, and Kirma Puranas. The
Vayu and Padma have much the same narrative as
that of our text; and so have the Agni and
Bhagavata, except that they refer only briefly to the
anger of Durvdsas, without narrating the
