BOOK IV, 2

311

ततश्च मान्धात्रा मुनिशापशङ्कितेन कन्यान्त:पुरवर्षवर:
समाज्ञप्त:। कन्यान्त:पुरं प्रविशन्नेव भगवानखिलसिद्ध-
गन्धर्व-मनुष्येभ्योऽतिशयेन कमनीयं रूपमकरोत्। प्रवेश्य च
महाराज: समाज्ञापयति, अयमस्मान् ब्रह्मर्षि: कन्यार्थी
after; इत्याकर्ण्य weat Wa at: कन्यका: सानुरागा:
समन्मथा: क tra इवेभयूथपतिं
वरयाम्बभूवुरूचुश्च।। २९॥

Mandhaté, unwilling to provoke the
indignation of the Muni, was accordingly
obliged to command the eunuch to lead the
sage into the inner chambers; who, as he
entered the apartments, put on a form and
features of beauty far exceeding the personal
charms of mortals or even of heavenly spirits.
His conductor, addressing the princesses, said
to them, "Your father, young ladies, sends you
this pious sage, who has demanded of him a
bride; and the Raja has promised him, that he
will not refuse him any one of you who shall
choose him for her husband." When the
damsels heard this and looked upon the person
of the Rsi, they were equally inspired with
passion and desire and like a troop of female
elephants disputing the favours of the master
of the herd, they all contended for the choice.

अलं भगिन्योऽहमिमं वृणोमि
वृतो मया नैष तवानुरूप:।
ममैव wat विधिनैष सृष्ट:
सृष्टाहमस्योपशामं प्रयाहि।। ३ ०॥
गृहं विशन्नेव विहन्यसे किम्।
मया मयेति क्षितिपात्मजानां
तदर्थमत्यर्थकलिर्बभूव।। 3 १॥
यदा तु सर्वाभिरतीव wrele
धृत: स कन्याभिरनिन्द्यकीर्ति:।
तदा स कन्याधिकृतो नृपाय
यथावदाचष्ट विनम्रमूर्ति:॥ ३ २॥

"Away, away, sister!" said each to the
other; "this is my election, he is my choice; he
is not a meet bridegroom for you; he has been
created by Brahma on purpose for me, as I
have been created in order to become his wife
: he has been chosen by me before you; you
have no right to prevent his becoming my
husband.” In this way arose a violent quarrel
amongst the daughters of the king, each
insisting upon the exclusive election of the Rs
i; and as the blameless sage was thus
contended for by the rival princess, the
superintendent of the inner apartments, with a
downcast look, reported to the king what had
occurred.

साधुशय्यासन परिच्छदा: प्रासादा:

त्यादिदेश।॥ ३ ३॥
तच्च तथैवानुष्ठितमशेषशिल्पविशेषाचार्य्यस्त्वष्टा
दर्शितवान्।। ३४॥
ततश्च परमर्षिणा सौभरिणाज्ञप्तस्तेषु गृहेष्वनपायानन्दनामा
महानिधिरासाञ्छक्रे।। ३५॥
ततोऽनवरतभक्ष्यभोज्यलेह्याद्युपभोगैरागतानुगतभृत्यादीनहर्नि
1शमशेषगृहेषु at: क्षितीशदुहितरो भोजयामासु:॥ ३६॥

Perplexed more that ever by _ this
information, the Raja exclaimed, "What is all
this! and what am I to do now! What is it that I
have said!" and at last, although with extreme
reluctance, he was obliged to agree that the Rs
i should marry all his daughters. Having then
wedded, agreeably to law, all the princesses,
the sage took them home to his habitation,
where he employed the chief of architects,
Visvakarman, equal in taste and skill to
Brahma himself, to construct separate palaces
for each of his wives; he ordered him to
