BOOK I, CHAP. 15

103

nothing surpasses. and Para. the end or object of
existence : he is Apara para, the farthest bound, of
that which is illumitable, or space and time : he is
Param parebhyah, above or beyond the highest,
being beyond or superior to all the elements : he is
Pararmatha ripi, or identical with final truth, or
knowledge of soul: he is Brahma para, the object or
essence of spiritual wisdom. Parapatabhitta is said
to imply the farther limit (Para) of rudimental
matter (Para); He is Para, or chief Paranam, of
those objects which are beyond the senses; and he
is Parapara, or the boundary of boundaries, that is.
he is the comprehensive investure of, and exterior
to, those limits by which soul is confined; be is free
from all encumbrance or impediment. The passage
may be interpreted in different way, according to
the ingenuity with which the riddle is read.

4. This part of the legend is peculiar to our text,
and the whole story of Mérisha's birth is nowhere
else so fully detailed. The penance of the
Pracetasas, and its consequences, are related in the
Agni, Bhagavata. Matsya, Padma, Vayu, and
Brahma Puranas, and allusion is briefly made to
Mérisha's birth. Her origin from Kandu and
Pralocha in narrated in a different place in the
Brahma Purana where the austerities of Kandu and
the necessity for their interruption, are described.
The story, from that authority, was translated by the
late Professor Chezy, and is published in the first
number of the Journal Asiatique.

5. The second birth of Daksa, and his share in
the peopling of the earth, is narrated in most of the
Puranas in a similar manner. It is perhaps the
original legend, for Daksa seems to be an irregular
adjunct to the Prajapatis, or mind-borm sons of
Brahma (ch. VII. N. 2); and the allegorical nature
of his posterity in the character (Ch. VII.) intimates
a more recent origin. Nor does that series of
descendants apparently occur in the Mahabhartam
although the existence of two Daksas is especially
remarked there (Moksa Dh.); तस्माद् 3 नामनी लीके दक्ष:
क इति चोत्यते। In the Adi Parva, which seems to be the
freest from subsequent improvements, the Daksa
noticed is the son of the Pracetasas. The
incompatibility of the two accounts is reconciled by
referring the two Daksas to different Manvantaras.
The Daksa who proceeded from Brahma as a
Prajapati being born in the first, or Svayambhuva.
and the son of the Pracetasas in the Chaksusa

. कन्यायां जनयत्प्रभु:।

Manvantara. The latter however, as descended from
Uttdnapada. should belong to the first period also.
It is evident that great confusion has been made by
the Puranas in Daksa’s history.

6. That, is. they are the Naksatras, or lunar
asterisms.

7. ‘They are removed' (निरुघ्यन्ते), which the
commentator explains by सुसुप्तवल्लीयन्ते। ‘are
absorbed, as if they were fast asleep;' but in every
age or Yuga, according to the text—in every
Manvantara. according to the comment—the Rsis
reappear, the circumstances of their origin only
being varied. Daksa therefore, as remarked in the
preceding note. is the son of Brahma in one period.
the son of the Pracetasas in another. So Soma. in
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, was born as the son
of Atri; in the Chaksusha, hc was produced by
churning the ocean. The words of our text occur in
the Hari Varhsa, with an unimportant variation ;
उत्पत्तिश्च निरोधश्च fed yay पार्थिव। ऋषयोऽत्र न मुह्यन्ति
विद्वांसश्चैव ये जना:॥ ‘Birth and obstruction are constant
in all beings, but Rsis and those men who are wise
are not perplexed by this :' that is, not. as rendered
above, by the alternation of life and death : but,
according to the commentator on the Hari Vamsa.
by a very different matter, the prohibition the
unlawful marriages. Utpatti of birth of progeny,’ is
the result of their will: Nirodha. 'obstruction,' is the
law prohibiting the intermarriage of persons
connected by the offering of the funeral cakc; निरोधो

नियम:। to which Rsis and sages are
not subject, either from their mairimonial unions
being merely platonic, or from the bad example act
by Brahma, who, according to the Vedas,
approached his own daughter; प्रजापतिर्वै
`स्वदुहितमभ्यध्यायदिति git: 1 a mystery we have already
had occasion to advert to (Ch. VII. n. 5). The
explanation of the text, however, given by the
commentator appears forced, and less natural than
the interpretation preferred above.

8. This is the usual account of Daksa's marriage,
and is that of the Mahabbarata, Adi P. and of the
Brahma Purana, which the Hari Varga, in the first
part, repeats. In another portion, the Puskara
Mahatmya. however, Daksa, it is said. converts half
himself into a female, by whom he begets the
daughters presently to be noticed: a: 1
Ta कन्या: पद्मनिभानना:। This
seems to be merely a new edition of an old story.
