460

THE VISNU-PURANAM

towards him, and affectionately embraced
him.
सह ताभ्यां तदाक्रूर: कृतसंवादनादिक:।
भुक्तभोज्यो यथान्यायमाचचक्षॆ ततस्तयो:॥४॥
यथा निर्भत्स्यते तेन कंसेनानकदुन्दुभि:।
यथा च देवकी देवी दानवेन दुरात्मना।५॥
उग्रसेने यथा HA: सुदुरात्मा च वर्त्तते।
a चैवार्थं समुद्दिश्य स कंसेन विसर्जित:।। ६॥
तत् wea विस्तराच्छुत्वा भगवान् केशिसूदन:।
उवाचाखिलमप्येतजूज्ञातं दानपते। मया।।७॥
करिष्ये च महाभाग। यदत्रौपयिकं मतम्।
विचिन्त्यं नान्यर्थतत् ते fate कंसं हतं मया।। ८॥

Then Kesava and Rama entered into
conversation with him, and, having heard from
him all that had occurrred, were much pleased,
and led him to their habitation: there they
resumed their discourse, and gave him food to
eat, and treated him with proper hospitality,
Akrira told them how their father
Anakadundubhi, the princess Devaki and even
his own father, Ugrasena, had been insulted by
the iniquitous, demon Kansa: he also related to
them the purpose for which he had been
dispatched. When he had told them all these
things, the destroyer of Kesin said to him, “TI

aa: प्रभाते विमले कृष्ण-रामौ महामती।

अक्रूरेण समं गन्तुमुद्यतौ मथुरां when १२॥

दृष्ट्वा गोपीजन: Bra: श्लथद्वलयबाहुक:।

नि:श्वस्य चातिदु:खार्त्त: We चेदनं परस्परम्॥ १३॥

Having given orders qccordingly to the
cowherds, Akrira, with Kesava and Rama,
retired to rest, and slept soundly in the
dwelling of Nanda. The next morning was
bright, and the youths prepared to depart for
Mathura with Akrira. The Gopis, seeing them
about to set forth, were much afflicted; they
wept bitterly, their bracelets were loose upon
their arms, and they thus communed together:

नागरस्त्री-कलालापमधु श्रोत्रेण पास्यति।। १४॥
विलासिवाक्यपानेषु नागरीणां कृतास्पदम्।

चित्तमस्य कथं भूयो ग्राम्यगोपीषु यास्यति।। १५॥

सारं समस्तगोष्ठस्य विधिना हरता हरिम्।

Wed गोपयोषित्सु निर्गुणेन दुरात्मना॥ १६॥
भावगर्भस्मितं वाक्यं विलासललिता गति:।
नागरीणामतीवैतत् कटाक्षेक्षितमेव A १७॥
भवतीनां gt: पार्श्व कया युक्त्या समेष्यति।। १८॥

“If Govinda depart for Mathura, how will

was aware of all that you have told me, lord of pe return to Gokula ? His ears will there be

liberal gifts:
मोपवृद्धाश्च यास्यन्ति आदायोपायनं बहु।। ९॥
निशेयं नीयतां वीर! न चिन्तां कर्ततुमर्हसि।
त्रिरात्राभ्यन्तरे कंसं हनिष्याभिम सहानुगम्॥ १०॥

Rama and I will go tomorrow to Mathura
along with you. The elders of the cowherds
shall accompany us, bearing ample offerings.
Rest here to-night, and dismiss all anxiety.
Within three nights I will slay Kansa and his
adherents.”

पराशर उवाच
समादिश्य ततो गोपनक्रूरोऽपि सकेशव:।
सुष्वाप बलभद्रश्च नन्दगोपगृहे TAT ११॥

regaled with the melodious and polished
conversation of the women of the city.
Accustomed to the language of the graceful
females of Mathura, he will never again
endure the rustic expressions of the Gopis.
Hari, the pride of the station, is carried off, and
a fatal blow is inflicted upon us by inexorable
destiny. Expressive smiles, soft language,
graceful airs, elegant gait, and significant
glances, belong to the women of the city, Hari
is of rustic breeding, and, captivated by their
fascinations, what likelihood is there of his
returning to the society of any one amongst
us?

एषैष रथमारुह्य मधुरां याति केशव:।
क्रूरेणाक्रूरकेणात्र निराशेन प्रतार्ति:॥ १९॥
