BOOK V, CHAP. 13

451

ता वार्य्यमाणा: पतिभि: fagfiratg free
कृष्णं गोपाह्यना रात्रौ रमयन्ति रतिप्रिया:॥५८॥
सोऽपि कैशोरकवयो मानयन् मधुसूदन:,

रेमे ताभिरमेयात्मा क्षपासु क्षपिताहित:।। ५ ९॥

तद्धर्त्तषु तथा तासु सर्वभूतेषु चेश्वर:।
आत्मस्वरूपरूपषोऽसौ व्याप्य सर्वमवस्थित:॥६०॥

यथा समस्तभूतेषु नभोऽग्नि: पृथिवी जलम्।
वायुश्चात्मा तथैवासौ व्याप्य सर्वमवस्थित:॥६१॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे त्रयोदश: अध्याय:।।
When leading, they followed him, when

returning, they encountered him; and, whether
he went forwards or backwards, they ever
attended on his steps. Whilst frolicking thus
with the Gopis, they considered every instant
without him a myriad of years; and, prohibited
in vain by husbands, fathers, brothers, they
went forth at night to sport with Krsna, the
object of their affection. Thus the illimitable
being, the benevolent remover of all
imperfections, assumed the character of youth
amongst the females of the herdsmen of Vraja;
pervading their natures, and that of their lords,
by his own essence, all diffusive like the wind
: for even as in all creatures the elements of
ether, fire, earth, water, and air, are
comprehended, so also is he every where
present, and in all.
NOTES

1. The Rasa dance is danced by men and women,
holding each other's hands, and going round in a
circle, singing the airs to which they dance.
According to Bharata, the airs are various both in
melody and time, and the number of persons should
not exceed sixty-four : चित्तताललयान्वितं।
आचतु: षष्टियुग्मत्वाद्रासकं मसृणोद्धतं।।

2. The soles of the feet of a deity are usually
marked by a variety of emblematical figures: this is
carried to the greatest extravagance by the
Buddhists, the mark on the feet of Gautama being
130: see Trans. R. As. Sac. Uff. 70.' It is a decoration
very moderately employed by the Hindus.

3. This is a rather inexplicit statement, but the
comment makes it clear, Krsna, it is said, in order
to form the circle, takes each damsel by the hand,

and leads her to her place: there he quits her : but
the effect of the contact is such, that it deprives her
of the power of perception, and she contentedly
takes the hand of her female neighbour, thinking it
to be Krsna's, The Bhagavata is bolder, and asserts
that Krsna multiplied himself, and actually stood
between each two damsels: ‘wares: सम्प्रवृत्तो
गोपीमण्डलमण्डित:। योगेश्वरेण कृष्णेन तासां मध्ये द्वयोर्द्वयो प्रविष्टेन इति।।
“The Rasa dance, formed of a circle graced by the
Gopis, was then led off by the Lord of magic, Krs
na having placed himself in the midst of every two
of the nymphs.” The Hari Vamsa intimates the
same, though not very fully: तास्तुपंक्तीकृता wal रमयन्ति
मनोरमम्। गायन्त्या: कृष्णचरितं द्वन्द्वशो गोपकन्यका:।। ‘Then all the
nymphs of the cowherds, placing themselves in
couples in a row, engaged in pleasant diversion,
singing the deeds of Krsna,’ The Paiikti, or row, is
said by the commentator to mean here, the
Mandala, or ring; and the 'couples’ to imply that
Krsna was between every two, He quotes a verse to
this effect from some other Vaisnava work:
अङ्गनामङ्गनामन्तरे Wea माधव: माधवं चान्तरे चाङ्गना संजगौ वेणुना
देवकीनन्दन:।। ‘Between each two damsels was
Madhava, and between each two Madhavas was a
nymph ; and the son of Devaki played on the flute:’
for, in fact, Krsna is not only dancing with each,
but also by himself in the centre: for this the
commentator on the Hari Vamsa cites a passage
from the Vedas: वस्ते पुरुरूपो ayia eal तस्थौ त्र्यविं रेरिहाणा:।।
Literally, The many formed being) assumes
(various) bodies. One form stood apart, occupying
triple observance’. Now if the verse be genuine, it
probably refers to something that has little to do
with Krsna; but it is explained to apply to the Rasa;
the form of Krsna being supposed to be meant as
wholly distinct from the Gopis, and yet being
bebeld by everyone of them, on each side and in
front of her. In the meditation upon Krsna, which is
enjoined in the Brahma Vaivartta, he is to be
contemplated in the centre of the Rasa Mandala, in
association with his favourite Radha; but the
Mandala described in that work is not a ring of
dancers, but a circle of definite space at Vrndavana,
within which Krsna, Radha, and the Gopis divert
themselves, not very decorously. This work has
probably given the tone to the style in which the
annual festival, the Rasa Yatra, is celebrated in
various parts of India, in the month of Kartika,
upon the sun's entrance into Libra,’ by nocturnal
