THE VISNU-PURANAM

108
CHAPTER 17
सप्तदशोऽध्याय:
(प्रह्लादचरितकथनम्)
पराशर उवाच
मैत्रेय श्रूयतां सम्यक् चरितं तस्य धीमत:।

प्रह्लादस्य सदोदारचसितिस्य महात्मन:।। १॥
दिते: पुत्रो महावीर्यो हिरण्यकशिपु: पुरा।
त्रैलोक्यं वशपानिन्ये ब्रह्मणो वरदपित:॥ २॥
इन्द्रत्वमकरोद दैत्य: स चासीत् afer स्वयम्।
वायुरग्निरपां नाथ: सोमश्लाभन्महासुर:।। ३॥
धनानामधिप: सोऽभूत् स एवासीत् स्वयं यम:।
यज्ञभागानशेषांस्तु स स्वयं बुभुजेऽसुर:।।४॥
देवा: स्वर्गं परित्यज्य तत् त्रासान् मुनिसत्तम।
विचेरुरवनौ ad विभ्राणा मानुषीं तनुम्।५॥
जित्वा त्रिभुवनं wd त्रैलोक्यैश्चर्यदर्पित:।
उपगीयमानो गन्धर्वैर्बुभुजे विषयान् प्रियान्॥६॥
उपासाञ्चक्रिरे सर्वे सिद्धगन्धर्वपन्नगा:।। ७।।
अवादयज्जगुश्चान्ये जयशब्दानथापरे।
दैत्यराजस्य पुरतश्चक्रु: सिद्धा मुदान्विता:॥८॥
तत्र प्रनृत्याप्सरसि स्फटिकाभ्रपयेऽसुर:।

षपौ पानं Yat युक्त: प्रासादे सुमनोहरे॥ ९॥

was the god of riches; he was the judge of the
dead; and he appropriated to himself, without
reserve, all that was offered in sacrifice to the
gods. The deities therefore, flying from their
seats in heaven, wandered, through fear of the
Daitya, upon the earth, disguised in mortal
shapes. Having conquered the three worlds, he
was inflated with pride, and, eulogized by the
Gandharvas, enjoyed whatever he desired. The
Gandharvas the Siddhas, and the snake-gods
all attended upon the mighty Hiranyakasipu,
as he sat at the banquet. The Siddhas delighted
stood before him, some playing on musical
instruments. some singing songs in his praise,
and others shouting cries of victory; whilst the
nymphs of heaven danced gracefull in the
crystal palace, where the Asura with pleasure
quafled the inebriating cup.

तस्य पुत्रो महाभाग: प्रह्लादो नाम नामत:।
पपाठ TES गुरुगेहे गतोऽर्भक:।। ol
एकदा तु स धर्मात्मा जगाम गुरुणा सह।
पानासक्तस्य पुरत: पितुर्दैत्यपतेस्तदा॥ ११॥
पादप्रणामावनतं तमुत्थाप्य पिता सुतम्।
हिरण्यकशिपु: wre प्रह्लादममितौजसम्॥ १२॥

The illustrious son of the Daitya king,
Prahlada. being yet a boy, resided in the
dwelling of his preceptor, where he read such
writings as are studied in early years. On one
occasion he came, accompanied by his
teacher, to the court of his father, and bowed
before his feet as he was drinking.
Hiranyakasipu desired his prostrate son to rise,
and said to him,

Pardsara said—Listen Maitreya, to the हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच

story of the wise and magnanimous Prahlada,
whose adventures are ever interesting and
instructive. Hiranyakasipu, the son of Diti, had
formerly brought the three worlds under his
authority, confiding in a boon bestowed upon
him by Brahma.' He had usurped the
sovereignty of Indra, and exercised of himself
the functions of the sun, of air, of the lord of
waters, of fire. and of the moon. He himself

पठ्यतां भवता वत्स! सारभूतं सुभाषितम्।
कालेनैतावता यत् ते सदोद्युक्तेन शिक्षितम्।। १३॥

Hiranyakasipu said— “Repeat, boy, in
substance, and agreeably, what during the
period of your studies you have acquired,”

wWelg sara
श्रूयतां तात! वक्ष्यामि सारभूतं तवाज्ञया।
