450

THE VISNU-PURANAM

wast Tet कृष्ण: पदमत्र न लक्ष्यते।
fronted शशाङ्कस्य नैतद्दीधितिगोचरे।। ४०॥
निव्रत्तास्तास्ततो गोप्यो निराशा: कृष्णदर्शने।
यमुनातीरमागत्य TYR TST ४ १॥

ततो ददृशुरायान्तं विकाशिमुखपङ्कजम्।
भोप्यस्त्रैलोक्यगोप्तारं कृष्णमक्विष्टचेष्टितम्।। ४ २॥
काचिदालोक्य गोविन्दमायन्तमतिहिर्षिता।

कृष्ण कृष्णेति कृष्णोति we नान्यवुदैरयत्॥४३॥
विलोक्य नेत्रभृङ्गाभ्यां पपौ यन्मुखपङ्कजम्॥४४॥
काचिदालोक्य गोविन्दं निमीलित-विलोचना |
तस्यैव रूपं ध्यायन्ती योगारूढेव Ura ४५॥

Undoubtedly he promised that he would
quickly come again, for here are his own
footsteps returning with speed. Here he has
entered the thick forest, impervious to the rays
of the moon, and his steps can be traccd no
farther.” Hopeless then of beholding Krsna,
the Gopis returned, and repaired to the banks
of the Yamuna, where they sang his songs; and
presently they behcld the preserver of the three
worlds, with a smiling aspect, hastening
towards them: on which, one exclaimed, “Krs
na! Krsna!” unable to articulate any thing else:
another affected to contract her forehead with
frowns, as drinking with the bees of her eyes
the lotus of the face of Hari: another, closing
her cyelids, contemplated internally his form,
as if engaged in an act of devotion.

निन्येऽनुनयमन्याञ्च करस्पर्शेन माधव:।॥ YE
ताभि: प्रसन्नचित्ताभिर्गोपीभि we सादरम्।
रराम रासगोष्ठीभिरुदारचरितो हरि:।॥४७॥
रासमण्डलबन्धोऽपि कृष्णपार्श्वमनुज्झता।
मोपीजनेन नैवाभूदेकस्थानस्थिरात्मना ॥४८॥
चकार तत्करस्पर्श-निमीलितदृशं ST ४९॥
तत: स Aga रासश्चलद्दलयानि:स्वन:।
अनुयातशरत्काव्यगेयगीतिरनुक्रमात् ॥५०॥

कृष्ण: शरच्चन्द्रमसं कौमुदी कुमुदाकरम्।

जगौ गोपीजनस्त्वकं कृष्णानाम पुन: पुन:।। ५ १॥
परिवर्त्तश्रमेणैका चलद्बलयलापिनीम्।

ददौ बाहुलतां स्कन्धे गोपी मधुनिघातिन:।। ५ २॥

Then Madhava, coming amongst them,
conciliated some with soft speeches, some
with gentle looks, and some he took by the
hand; and the illustrious deity sported with
them in the stations of the dance. As each of
the Gopis, however, attempted to keep in one
place, close to the side of Krsna, the circle of
the dance could not be constructed, and he
therefore took each by the hand, and when
their eyelids were shut by the effects of such
touch, the circle was formed’ Then proceeded
the dance to the music of their clashing
bracelets, and songs that celebrated in suitable
strain the charms of the autumnal season. Krs
na sang the moon of autumn, a mine of gentle
radiance! but the nymphs repeated the praises
of Krsna alone.

काचित् प्रविलसद्बाहु: परिरभ्य चुचुम्ब तम्।

गोपी गीतस्तुतिव्याज-निपुणा मधूसूदनम्॥ ५३॥
पुलकोद्गमशस्याय स्वेदाम्बुधनतां गतौ॥ ५४॥
रासगेयं जगौ कृष्णो यावत् तारतरध्वनि:।

साधु कृष्णेति कृष्णेति तावत् ता द्विगुणं जगु:।। ५५॥

At times, one of them, wearied by the
revolving dance, threw her arms, ornamented
with tinkling bracelets, round the neck of the
destroyer of Madhu: another, skilled in the are
of singing his praises, embraced him. The
drops of perspiration from the arms of Hari
were like fertilizing rain, which produced a
crop of down upon the temples of the Gopis,
Krsna sang the strain that was appropriate to
the dance. The Gopis repeatedly exclaimed,
“Bravo, Krsna!” to his song.

गते तु गमनं चक्रुर्वलने सम्मुखं ययु:।
प्रतिलोमानुलोमाभ्यां भेजुर्गोपाङ्गना हरिम्॥५६॥
स तथा सह गोपीभि रराम मधुसूदन:।
यथाब्दकोटिप्रमित: क्षणस्तेन विनाभवत्।। ५७॥
