BOOK III, CHAP. 3

every accession of good fortune, the rite by
which the class of progenitors termed
Nandimukha is propitiated.? A householder
should diligently worship the Pitrs so named,
at the marriage of a son or daughter, on
entering a new dwelling, on giving a name to a
child, on performing his tonsure and other
purificatory ceremonies, at the binding of the
mother's hair during gestation or on first
seeing the face of a son or the like. The
Sraddha on such occasions, however, has been
briefly alluded to. Hear now, oh king the rules
for the performance of obsequial rites.

दग्ध्वा ग्रामाद् बहि: स्नात्वा सचेला: सलिलाशये।। ८॥
यत्र यत्र स्थितायैतदमुकायेतिवादिन:।

दक्षिणाभिमुखा agaraa: सलिलाञ्जलिम्॥ ९॥
प्रविष्टाश्च समं गोभिर्ग्रमं नक्षत्रदर्शने।
कटधर्मांस्तत: कुर्युर्भूमौ प्रस्तरशायिन:।। १०॥

feat च भक्तं भोक्तव्यममांसं मनुजर्षभ।। ११॥

दिनादि तावदिच्छात: कर्त्तव्यं विप्रभोजनम्।

प्रेतस्तृप्तिं तथा याति बन्धुवर्गेण भुञ्जता।। १२॥
प्रथमेऽह्नि तृतीये च सप्तमे नवमे तथा।

वस्त्रत्यागं बहि: स्नानं कृत्वा दद्यात् तिलोदकम्।। १३॥
ततोऽनु बन्धुवर्गस्तु भुविदद्यात् तिलोदकम्।

"Having washed the corpse with holy
water, decorated it with garlands and burnt it
without the village, the kinsmen, having
bathed with their clothes on, are to stand with
their faces to the south and offer libations to
the deceased, addressing him by name and
adding, "wherever you may be." They then
return, along with the cattle coming from
pasture, to the village; and upon the
appearance of the stars retire to_rest, sleeping
on mats spread upon the earth. Every day
(while the mourning lasts) a cake or ball of
food’ is to be placed on the ground, as an
offering to the deceased; and rice, without,
flesh, is to be daily eaten. Brahmanas are to be
fed for as many days as the mourner pleases,

271

for the soul of the defunct derives satisfaction
accordingly as his relatives are content with
their entertainment. On the first day or the
third or seventh or ninth (after the death of a
person), his kinsmen should change their
raiment and bathe out of doors and offer a
libation of water, with (tila) sesamum-seeds.

चतुर्थेऽह्नि च कर्त्तव्यं भस्मास्थिचयनं नृप।
तदूर्द्धमङ्गसंस्पर्शश्च सपिण्डानामपीष्यते।। १४॥
योग्या: सर्वक्रियाणान्तु समानसलिलास्तथा।

अनुलेपनपुष्पादिभोगादन्यत्र पाथिव।। १५॥
शय्यासनोपभोगश्च सपिण्डानामपीष्यते।

भस्मास्थिचयनादूर्छ संयोगो न तु योषिता।। १६॥

On the fourth day® the ashes and bones
should be collected: after which the body of
one connected with the deceased by offerings
of funeral cakes may be touched (by an
indifferent person), without thereby incurring
impurity; and those who are related only by
prescntation_of water are qualified for any
occupation.’ The former class of relatives may
use beds, but they must still refrain from
unguents and flowers and must observe
continence, after the ashes and bones have
been collected (until the mourning is over).

बाले देशान्तरस्थे च पतिते च मुनौ मृते।
सद्य:शौचं तथेच्छातो जलाग्न्युद्बन्धनादिषु॥ १७॥
मृतबन्धोर्दशाहानि कुलस्यान्नं न भुज्यते।

दानं प्रतिग्रहो यज्ञ: स्वाध्यायश्च निवर्तते।। १८॥

When the deceased is a child or one who is
abroad or who has been degraded or a spiritual
preceptor, the period of uncleanness is but
brief and the ceremonies with fire and water
are discretional. The food of a family in which
a kinsman is deceased is not to be partaken of
for ten days®; and during that period, gifts,
acceptance, sacrifice and sacred study are
suspended.

विप्रस्यैतद् द्वादशाहं राजन्यस्याप्यशौचकम्।

अर्द्धमासश्च वैश्यस्य मासं शूद्रस्य शुद्धये।। १९॥
आयुजो भोजयेत् कामं द्विजानाद्ये ततो दिने।
gang दर्भेषु पिण्डञ्च प्रेतायोच्छिष्टसन्निधौ।। २०॥
