BOOK III, CHAP. 4

235

CHAPTER 4
चतुर्थोऽध्याय:
(वेदव्यासमाहात्म्य वेदविभागवर्णनम्)
पराशर उवाच
आद्यो वेदश्चतुष्पाद: शतसाहस्रसम्मित:।
ततो दशगुण: Peet यज्ञोऽयं सर्वकामधुक्।। VI
WAST मत्सुत्तो व्यासो ह्यष्टाविंशतिमेऽन्तरे।
वेदमेकं चतुष्पादं चतुर्धा व्यभजत् Ws २॥
यथा तु तेन वै व्यस्ता वेदव्यासेन धीमता।
वेदास्तथा समस्तैस्तैर्व्यस्ता व्यासैस्तथा AAT ३॥
तदनेनैव वेदानां शाखाभेदान् द्विजोत्तम?
चतुर्युगेष्वारचितान् समस्तेष्ववधारय।।४॥

कोऽन्यो fe भुवि मैत्रेय! महाभारतकृद् भवेत्।। ५॥
तेन व्यस्ता यथा वेदा मत्पुत्रेण महात्मना।
द्वापरे ह्यत्र मैत्रेय! तस्मिन् शृणु यथार्थत:॥६॥

?दाव्वऽभ्षाव said— The original Veda, in four
parts, consisted of one hundred thousand
stanzas; and from it sacrifice of ten kinds’, the
accomplisher of all desires, proceeded. In the
twenty-eighth Dvapara age my son Vyasa
separated the four portions of the Veda into
four. Vedas. In the same manner as the Vedas
were arranged by him, as Vedavydsa, so were
they divided in former periods by all the
preceding Vyasas and by myself : and the
branches into which they were subdivided by
him were the same into which they had been
distributed in every aggregate of the four ages.
Know, Maitreya, the Vyasa called Krsna
Dvaipayana to be the deity Narayana; for who
else on their earth could have composed the
Mahabharata”? Into what portions the Vedas
were arranged by my magnanimous son, in the
Dvapara age, you shall hear.

ब्रह्मणां चोदितो व्यासो वेदान् व्यस्तुं प्रचक्रमे।
अथ शिष्यान् स जग्राह चतुरो वेदपारगान्।। ७॥
ऋग्वेदश्रावकं पैलं जग्राह स महामुनि:।
वैशम्पायननामानं यजुर्वेदस्य चाग्रहीत्।। ८॥
जैमिनि सामवेदस्य तथैवाथर्ववेदवित्।

सुमन्तुस्तस्य शिष्योऽभूद् वेदव्यासस्य धीमद:॥ ९॥
रोमहर्षणनामानं महाबुद्धिं महामुनि:।

सूतं जग्राह शिष्यं स इतिहास-पुराणयो:॥ १०॥

When Vy4sa was enjoined by Brahma to
arrange the Vedas in different books, he took
four persons, well read in those works, as his
disciples. He appointed Paila reader of the
Rk’; Vaigampayana of the Yajus; and Jaimini
of the Samaveda and Sumantu, who was
conversant with the Atharvaveda, was also the
disciple of the learned Vyasa. He also took

Sata who was named Lomaharsana, as his
pupil in historical and legendary traditions’.
