172

The Ksiroda ocean (or sea of milk) is
encompassed by the seventh Dvipa, or Pus
kara, which is twice the size of Saka-dvipa.
Savana, who was made its sovereign, had but
two sons, Mahavira and Dhatoki, after whom
the two Varsas of Puskara were so named.
These are divided by one mighty range of
mountains, called Manasottara, which runs in
a circular direction (forming an outer and an
inner circle). This mountain is fifty thousand
Yojanas in height, and as many in its breadth;
dividing the Dvipa in the middle, as if with a
bracelet, into two divisions, which are also of
a circular form, like the mountain that
separates them. Of these two, the Mahavira-
varsa is exterior to the circumference of
Manasottara, and Dhataki lies within the
circle; and both are frequented by heavenly
spirits and gods. There are no other mountains
in Puskara, neither are there any rivers.? Men
in this Dvipa live a thousand years, free from
sickness and sorrow, and unruffled by anger or
affection. There is neither virtue nor vice,
killer nor slain: there is no jealousy, envy,
fear, hatred, covetousness, nor any moral
defeact: neither is there truth or falshood. Food
is Spontaneously produced there, and all the
inhabitants feed upon vainds of every flavour.
Men there are indeed of the same nature with
gods, and of the same form and habits. There
is no distinction of caste or order; there are no
fixed institutes; nor are rites performed for the
sake of advantage. The three Vedas, the
Puranas, ethics, and polity, and the laws of
service, are unknown. Puskara is in fact, in
both its divisions, a terrestrial paradise, where
time yields ‘happiness to all its inhabitants,
who are exempt from sickness and decay. A
Nyagrodha-tree (Ficus indica) grows on this
Dvipa, which is the especial abode of Brahma,
and he resides in its, adored by the gods and
demons .Pushkara is surrounded by the sea of
fresh water, which is of equal extent with the
continent it invests.‘

`समेन पुष्करस्यैव विस्तारान्मण्डलं तथा।

‘THE VISNU-PURANAM

एवं द्वीपा: समुद्रैश्च सप्त सप्तभिरावृता:।। ८७॥।
द्वीपश्चैव समुद्रैश्च समानौ द्विगुणौ परौ।। ८८॥
पयांसि सर्वदा सर्व-समुद्रेषु समानि वै।
न्यूनातिरिक्तता तेषां कदाचिन्नैव जायते।। ८ ९॥
स्थालीस्थमग्निसंयोगादुद्रेकि सलिलं यथा।
तथेन्दुवृद्धौ सलिलमम्भोधौ मुनिसत्तम।।९०॥

न न्यूना नातिरिक्ताश्च वर्द्धन्त्यापो Sart च।
उदयास्तमयेष्विन्दो: पक्षयो: शुक्लकृष्णयो:।। ९ १॥
दशोत्तराणि पञ्चैव अन्दुलानां शतानि वै।

अपां वृद्धिक्षयौ द्रष्टौ सामुद्रीणां महामुने॥९२॥
भोजनं पुष्करद्वीपे aa स्वयमुपस्थितम्।

षड्रसं भुञ्जते विप्र! प्रजा: सर्वा: सदैव fee au

In this manner the seven island continents
are encompassed sucessively by the seven
oceans, and each ocean and continent is
respectively of twice the extent of that which
precedes it. In all the oceans the water remains
at all times the same in quantity, and never
increases or diminshcs; but like the water in a
caldron, which in consequence of its
combination with heat, expands, so the waters
of the ocean swell with the increase of the
moon. The waters, although really neither
more. nor less, dilate or contract as the moon
increases or wanes in the light and dark
fortnights. The rise and fall of the waters of
the different seas is five hundred and ten
inches.°

स्वादूदकस्य परतो दृश्यतेऽलोकसंस्थिति:।

द्विगुणा काञ्चनी भूमि:; सर्वजन्तुविवर्जिता।। ९४॥
लोकालोकस्तथा शैलो योजनायुतविस्तृत:।
serenity तावन्ति सहस्राण्यचलो हि स:॥९५॥
ततस्तम: समावृत्य तं शैलं सर्वत: स्थितम्।
तमश्चाण्डकटाहेन समन्तात् परिवेष्टितम्।। ९६॥
सहैवाण्डकटाहेन सद्बीपाब्धिमहीधरा।। ९७॥

Beyond the sea of fresh water is a region of
twice its extent, where the land is of gold, and
where no living beings reside. Thence extends
