86

respectfully saluted the king, and thus spoke:
“All undertakings are successful, if suitable
means of effecting them are employed. I will
impart to you means of success, which you can
make use of if you please. All vegetable
produces are old, and destroyed by me; but at
your command I will restore them, as
developed from my milk. Do you therefore,
for the benefit of mankind, most virtuous of
princes, give me that calf, by which I may be
able to secrete milk. Make also all places
level, so that I may cause my milk, the seed of
all vegetation, to flow every where around.’

पराशर उवाच

तत उत्सारयामास शैलान्शतसहस्रश:।

धनु:कोट्या तदा वैण्यस्तत: Yew विवर्जिता:॥ wi

न fe पूर्वविसर्गे वै विषमे पृथिवीतले।

प्रविभाग: पुराणं वा ग्रामाणां वा तदाभवत्।। ८ २॥

न शस्यानि न गोरक्षं न कृषिर्न वणिक्पथ:।

वैण्यात्पृभृति मैत्रेय सर्वस्यैतस्य सम्भव:।। ८ ३॥

यत्र यत्र समं तस्या भूमेरासीन्नराधिप:।

awa तत्र प्राजानां fe निवासं समरोचयत्॥ ८ vil

Mat: फलमूलानि प्रजानामभवत् तदा।

FSU महता सोऽपि प्रनष्टास्वौषधीषु वै।। ८५॥

स कल्पयित्वा वत्सं तु मनुं स्वायम्भुव प्रभु:।

स्वे पाणौ पृथिवीनाथो दुदोह पृथिवीं पृथु:॥ ८६॥

Prthu accordingly uprooted the mountains,

by hundreds and thousands, for myriads of
leagues, and they were thenceforth piled upon
one another. Before his time there were no
defined boundarics of villages or towns, upon
the irregular surface of the earth; there was no
cultivation, no pasture, no agriculture, no
highway for merchants: all these things (or all
civilization) originated in the reign of Prthu.
Where the ground was made level, the king
induced his subjects to take up their abode.
Before his time, also, the fruits and roots
which constituted the food of the people were
procured with great difficulty, all vegetables
having been destroyed; and he therefore,
having made Swayambhuva Manu the calf*

THE VISNU-PURANAM

milked the Earth, and received the milk into
his own hand, for the benefit of mankind.

शस्यजातानि सर्वाणि प्रजानां हितकाम्यया।

तेनान्नेन प्रजास्तात वर्त्तन्तेऽद्यापि नित्यश:।। ८ ७॥

प्राणप्रदानात् स पृथुर्यस्माद् भूमेरभूत् पिता।

ततस्तु पृथिवोसज्ञामवापाखिलघारिणौ॥ ८८॥

गन्धर्वैरुरगैर्यक्षै: पितृभिस्तरुभिस्तघा॥ ८९॥

तत् तत् पात्रमुपादाय तत AE SAT मुने पय:।

वत्सदोग्धूविशेषाश्च तेषां तद्योनयोऽभवन्।॥ ९ ०॥

Thence proceeded all kinds of corn and

vegetables upon which people subsist now and
perpetually. By granting life to the Earth.
Prthu was as her father, and she thence derived
the patronymic appellation Prthivi (the
daughter of Prthu). Then the gods. the sages,
the demons, the Raksasas, the Gandharbhas,
Yaksus, Pitris, serpents, mountains, and trees,
took a milking vessel suited to their kind. and
milked the earth of appropriate milk, and the
milker and the calf were both peculiar to their
own species’.

सैषा at विधात्री च धारिणी पोषिणी तथा।

सर्वस्य जगत: पृथ्वी विष्णुपादतलोद्भवा। ९ vil

एवं प्रभाव: स पृथु: पुत्रो वेणस्य वीर्यवान्।

जज्ञे महीषति: पूर्वो राजभूञ्जनरञ्जनात्।। ९ २॥

च इदं जन्म वैण्यस्य पृथो: कीर्त्तयते नर:।

न Ter दुष्कृतं किञ्चित् फलदायी प्रजायते।। ९ ३॥

पृथोर्जन्म प्रभावश्च करोति सततं FOTN ९४॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:।

This Earth, the mother, the nurse, the
receptacle, and nourisher of all existent things,
was produced from the sole of the foot of
Visnu. And thus was born the mighty Prthu.
the heroic son of Vena, who was the lord of
the earth, and who, from conciliating the
affections of the people, was the first ruler to
whom the title of Raja was ascribed. Whoever
shall recite this story of the birth of Prthu. the
son of Vena, shall never suffer any retribution
