BOOK I, CHAP. 6

35

clustered round her brow.” The Asuras address her,
and win her to become their bride. To the four
forms of our text, the same work adds, Tandri,
‘sloth,’ Jrmbhikaé, ‘yawning;’ Nidra, ‘sleep,’
Unmada, insanity; Antarddhdna. 'disappearance;'
Pratibimba, 'reflexion;' which become the property
of Pisachas, Kinnaras, Bhiitas, Gandharvas,
Vidyadharas, Sadhyas, Pitrs, and Manus. The
notions of night, day, twilight, and moonlight being
derived from Brahma, seem to have originated with
the Vedas. Thus the commentator on the Bhagavata
observes, याऽस्य तनुरासीत् तामपाहत सा तमिस्राभवदिति श्रुति:।
‘That which was his body and was left, was
darkness: this is the Sruti.' All the authorities place
night before day, and the Asuras or Titans before
the gods, in the order of appearance; as-did Hesiod
and other ancient theogonists

16. From Raksa, ‘to preserve.’

17. From Yaksa, 'to eat,"

18. From Srip, srpo, 'to creep,’ and from Ha, 'to
abandon.

19, Gam dhayantah, “drinking speech.”

20 This and the preceding enumeration of the
origin of vegetables and animals occurs in several
Puranas, precisely in the same words. The Litiga
adds a specification of the Aranya, or wild animals,
which are said to be the buffalo, gayal, bear.
monkey, sarabha, woif, and lion.

21. This specification of the parts of the Vedas
that proceed from Brahma occurs, in the same
words, in the Vayu, Linga, Kirma, Padma. and
Markandeya Purdnas. The Bhagavata offers some
important varieties: “From his eastern and other
mouths he created the Rik. Yajush. Sama, and
Atharvan vedas; the Sastra or ‘the unuttered
incantation;' Ijya 'oblation:' Stuti and Stoma-prayers
and hymns; and Prayascitta, ‘explation' or ‘sacred
philosophy' (BrahmA). also the Vedas of medicine,
arms, music, and mechanics; and the Itihasas and
Puranas, which are a fifth Veda: also the portions of
the Vedas called Sorasi, Uktha, Purisi. Agnistut,
Aptoryama. Atiratra, Vajapeya, Gosava; the four
parts of virtue, purity, liberality, piety, and truth:
the orders of life. and their institutes and different
religious rites and professions; and the sciences of
logic, ethics, and polity. The mystic words and
monosyllable proceeded from his heart; the metre
Usnis from the hairs of his body; Gayatri from his
skin, Tristubh from his flesh; Anustubh from his

tendons; Jagati from his bones; Pankti from his
marrow: Brhati from his breath. The consonants
were his life: the vowels his body: the sibilants his
senses: the semi-vowels his vigour". This
mysticism, although perhaps expanded and
amplified by the Pauraniks, appears to originate
with the Vedas: as in the text, HY स्नावान्। ‘The
metre was of the tendons,’ The different portions of
the Vedas specified in the text are yet, for the most
part, uninvestigated.
OK oe
