294

On their arrival at home, the husband and
wife, as usual, performed the worship of Vis
nu, agreeably to the ritual.

कालेन गच्छता राजा ममारासौ सपत्नजित्।
अन्वारुरोह तं देवी चितास्थं भूपतिं पतिम्।। ६०॥।
After a time the Rajd, triumphant over his

enemies, died; and the princess ascended the
funeral pile of her husband.

स तु तेनापचारेण श्वा जज्ञे वसुधाधिप:।
उपोषितेन पाषण्डसंलापी य: कृतोऽभवत्॥ ६ १॥
सा तु जातिस्मरा जज्ञे काशीराजसुता शुभा।
सर्वविज्ञानसम्पूर्णा पूर्वलक्षणपूजिता॥। ६ २॥
तां पिता दातुकामोऽभूत् वराय विनिवारित:।
तयैव तन्व्या विरतो विवाहारम्भतो नृप:।। ६३॥

_ In consequence of the fault committed by
Satadhanu, by speaking to an infidel when he
was engaged in a solemn fast, he was born
again as a dog. His wife was born as the
daughter of the king of KAsi, with a knowledge
of the cvents of her _prc-existence,
accomplished in every science and endowed
with every virtue. Her father was anxious to
giver her in marriage to some suitable
husband, but she constantly opposed his
design and the king was prevented by her from
accomplishing her nuptials.

तत: सा दिव्यया दृष्ट्या get aM निजं पतिम्।
विदिशाख्यं पुरं गत्वा तदवस्थं ददर्श तम्॥ ६४॥
तं oa महाभागं श्वभूतन्तु oft तथा।

ददौ तस्मै वराहारं सत्कारप्रवणं शुभम्॥६५॥
भुञ्जन् दत्तं तया सोऽन्नमतिमृष्टमभीप्सितम्।
श्वजातिललितं कुर्वन् बहु We चकार ag GI
aria व्रीडिता aren कुर्वता ae तेन सा।
प्रणामपूर्वमाहेदं दयितं तं कुयोनिजम्।॥ ६७॥

With the eye of divine intelligence she
knew that her own husband has been
regenerate as a dog and going once to the city
of Vidisa she saw the dog and recognised her

former lord in him. Knowing that the animal
was her husband, she placed upon his neck the

THE VISNU-PURANAM

bridal. garland, accompanying it with the
marriage rites and prayers : but he, eating the
delicate food presented to him, expressed his
delight after the fashion of his species; at
which she was much ashamed and bowing
reverently to him, thus spoke to her degraded
spouse :
पत्न्युवाच

स्मर्यतां तन्महाराज! दाक्षिण्यललितं त्वया।

येन श्वयोनिमापन्नो मम चाटुकरो भवान्।। ६८॥

पाषण्डिनं समाभाष्य तीर्थस्नानादनन्तरम्।

प्राप्तोऽसि कुत्सितां योनिं किं न स्मरसि तत्प्रभो!।। ६९॥

Spouse said— "Recall to memory,
illustrious prince, the ill-timed politeness on
account of which you have been born as a dog
and are now fawning upon me. In consequence
of speaking to a heretic, after bathing in a

sacrcd river, you have been condcmned to this
abject birth. Do you not remember it?"

श्रीपराशर उवाच

aaa antes तस्मिन् पूर्वजातिकृते Ten

दध्यौ चिरमथावाप निर्वेदमतिदुर्लभम्।।७०॥

निर्विण्णचित्त: स ततो निर्गम्य नगराद् बहि:।

मरुप्रपतनं कृत्वा शार्गालीं योनिमागत:। el

Parasara said~ Thus reminded, the Raja

recollected his former condition and was lost
in thought and felt deep humiliation. With a
broken spirit he went forth from the city and
falling dead in the desert, was born a new as a
jackal.

सापि द्वितीये सम्प्राप्ते ad दिव्येन चक्षुषा।

ज्ञात्वा yet तं द्रष्टुं ययौ कोलाहलं faq
तत्रापि दृष्टा तं प्राह शार्गालीं योनिमागतम्।
भर्त्तरमतिचार्वङ्गो तनया पृथिवीपते।। ७३॥

In the course of the following year the
princess knew what had happened and went to
the mountain Koladhala to seek for her
husband. Finding him there, the lovely
daughter of the king of the earth said to her
lord, thus disguised as a jackal,
