402

THE VISNU-PURANAM

inscriptions, on columns and rocks, by a Buddhist
prince, in an ancient form of letter and the Pali
language, exist in India; and that some of them
refer to Greek princes, who can be no other than
members of the Seleucidan and ptolemaean
dynasties and are probably Antiochus the Great and
Ptolemy Euergetes, kings of Syria and Egypt in the
latter part of the third century before Christ.
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, February
and March, 1838. The Indian king appears always
under the appellation Piyadasi or Priyadarsin, 'the
beautiful;' and his entitled Devanam-piya, ‘the
beloved of the gods.' According to Buddhist
authorities, the Rasavahini and Dipavamsa, quoted
by Turnour (J. As. Soc. Of Bengal, Dec., 1837, p.
1056 and Nov. 1838, p. 930), Piyadasi or
Piyadagano is identificd both by name and
circumstances with Asoka and to him therefore the
inscriptions must be attributed. Their purpose
agrees well enough with his character and their
wide diffusion with the traditionally report of the
number of his monuments. His date is not exactly
that of Antiochus the great, but it is not very far
different and the corrections required to make it
correspond are no more than the inexact manner in
which both Brahmanical and Buddhist chronology
is preserved may well be expected to render
necessary.

24. The name of Dasaratha, in a similar ancient
character as that of Piyadasi's inscriptions, has been
found at Gaya amongst Buddhist remains and like
them deciphered by Prinsep, Journal, As. Society
Bengal, August, 1837, p. 677. A different series of
names occur in the Vayu; or Kusgala, 8 years;
Bandhupalita, Indrapalita, Dasavarman, 7 years;
Satadhara, 8 years; and Vrhadasva, 7 years. The
Bhagavata agrees in most of the names and its
omission of Dasaratha is corrected by the
commentator.

25. Satadhanvan, Bhagavata.

26. The Vayu says nine Sumirttyas reigned 137
years. The Matsya and Bhagavata have ten
Mauryas and 137 years. The detailed numbers of
the Vayu and Matsya differ from their totals, but
the copies are manifestly corrupt.

27. The Bhagavata omits this name, but states
that there were ten Surigas, although, without Pus
pamitra, only nine are named. The Vayu and
Matsya have the same account of the circumstances

of his accession to the throne; the former gives him
a reign of sixty, the latter of thirty-six years. In a
play attributed to Kélidasa, the Malavikagnimitra,
of which Agnimitra is the hero, his father is alluded
to as the Sendni or general, as if he had deposed his
master in favour, not of himself, but of his son.
Agnimitra is termed king of Vidisé, not of
Magadha. Puspamitra is represented as engaged in
a conflict with the Yavanas on the Indus; thus
continuing the political rclations with the Greeks or
Scythians of Bactria and Ariana. See Hindu
Theatre, vol. 1. 347.

28. 8 years V.; omitted M.

29.7 years V. and M.; but the latter places him
after Vasumitra; and in the drama the son of
Agnimitra is called Vasumitra.

30. 8 years V.; 10 years M.

31. Andraka, V. Antaka, M. : they agree in his
reign, 2 years, Bhadraka, Bhagavata.

32.3 years V. and M.

33. 3 years V.; omitted, M.; Ghosa, Bhagavata.

34. 9 years M.

35. Bhagavata M.; 32 years V. and M.

36. Ksemabhimi, V.; Devabhimi, M.;
both.

37. The Bhagavata says, ‘more than a hundred,'
शताधिकं। The commentator explains it 112, द्वादशाधिकं।
The Vayu and Matsya have the same period.

38. The names of the four princes agree in all the
authorities. The Matsya transfers the character of
Vyasani to the minister, with the further addition of
his being a Brahmana; Dvija. In the lists given by
Jones and Wilford, the four Kanvas are said to have
reigned 345 years; but in seven copies of the Visnu
Purana, from different parts of India, the number is,
as given in the text, forty-five ; Ud काण्वायनाश्चत्वार:
पंचचत्वारिंशद्वर्षाणि भूपतयो भविष्यन्ति। There is however
authority for the larger number, both in the text of
the Bhagavata and the comment. The former has,
काण्वायना इमे भूमिं चत्वारिंशच्च पंचच। शतानि त्रीणि भोक्ष्यन्ति
वर्षाणां च कलौ ain and the latter, काण्वायनाश्चवर्षाणां
त्रीणिशतानि tangas भूमिं भोक्ष्यन्ति। There is no
doubt therefore of the purpose of the text; and it is
only surprising that such a chronology should have
been inserted in the Bhagavata, not only in
Opposing to all probability, but to other authority.
The Vayu and Matsya not only confirm the lower
number by stating it as a total, but by giving it in
detail; thus Vasudeva will reign 9 years,

10 years
