410

THE VISNU-PURANAM

place in the fourteenth century B.C. Bentley brings
the date of Yudhisthira, the chief of the Pandavas,
to 575 B.C. (Historical View of Hindu Astronomy,
p. 67); but the weight of authority is in favour of
the thirteenth or fourteenth century B.C. for the war
of the Mahabharata and the reputed commencement
of the Kali age.

82. A similar explanation is given in the
Bhagavata, Vayu and Matsya Puranas; and like
accounts from astronomical writers are cited by
Colebrooke, As. Res. Vol. IX. P. 358. The
commentator on the Bhagavata thus explains the
notion : "The two stars (Pulaha and Kratu) must
rise or be visible before the rest and whichever
asterism is in a line south from the middle of those
stars, is that with which the seven stars are united;
and so they continue for one hundred years."
Wilford has also given a like explanation of the
revolution of the Rsis; As. Res. Vol. IX. P. 83.
According to Bentley the notion originated in a
contrivance of the astronomers to show the quantity
of the precession of the equinoxes. "This was by
assuming an imaginary line or great circle passing
through the poles of the ecliptic and the beginning
of the fixed Magha, which circle was supposed to
cut some of the stars in the Great Bear. The seven
stars in the Great Bea the circle so assumed was
called the line of the Rsis and being fixed to the
beginning of the lunar asterism Magha, the
precession would be solved by stating the degree
etc., of any moveable lunar mansion cut by that
fixed line or circle as an index. Historical View of
Hindu Astronomy, p.65.

83. The Bhagavata has the same; and this agrees
with the period assigned for the interval between
Pariksit and Nanda of 1050 years; as, including
Magha, we have ten asterisms to Purvasadha or
1000 years. The Vayu and Matsya are so very
inaccurate in all the copies consulted, that it is not
safe to affirm what they mean to describe
apparently they state that at the end of the Andhra
dynasty the Rsis will be in Krttika, which furnishes
other ten asterisms; the whole being nearly in
accordance with the chronology of the text, as the
total interval from Pariksit to the last of the
Andhras is 1050+836=1886 and the entire century

of each asterism at the beginning and end of the
series need not be taken into account The copies of
the Matsya read, सप्तर्षयस्तथा तेस्यु: प्रदीप्ताग्नि ati ‘The
seven Rsis are on a line with the brilliant Agni;’
that is, with Krttika, of which Agni is the presiding
deity . The Vayu intends in all probability the same
phrase, but the three copies have, प्रतीपे राज्ञि। a very
unintelligible clause. Again, it seems as if they
intended to designate the end of the Andhra race as
the period of a complete revolution or 2700 years;
for the Vayu has, सप्तविंशै: wa भविव्या अन्थ्राणान्तेऽन्वया पुन:।
‘The races at the end of the Andhras will be after
2700 years:’ the Matsya has, सप्तविंशति भाव्येन
अन्ध्राणान्तेन्थकात् (7) पुन:। and at the close of the passage,
after specifying as usual that ‘the seven Rsis were
in Magha in the time of Pariksit.” सप्तर्षयो मधायुक्ता: कालै
`परीक्षित: समे। the Vayu adds, अन्ध्रान्ते स चतुर्विंशे भविष्यन्ति स ते
मता। a passage which, though repeated in the MSS.,
is obviously most inaccurate; although it might
perhaps be understood to intimate that the Rsis will
be in the twenty-fourth asterism after the Andhra
race : but that would give only 1400 years from
Pariksit to Puloma; whilst if the twenty-fourth from
Magha was intended, it would give 2400 years :
both periods being incompatible with previous
specifications. The Matsya has a different reading
of the second line, but one not much more
satisfactory; भविष्यन्ति शतंसमा:। ‘A hundred
years of Brahma will be in the twenty-fourth
(asterism?),’ In neither of these authorities,
however, is it proposed by the last-cited passages to
illustrate the chronology of princes or dynasties: the
specification of the period, whatever it may be, is
that of the era at which the evil influence of the
Kali age is to become most active and irresistible.

84. The Bhagavata has the same. Devapi, as the
commentator observes, being the restorer of the
lunar and Maru of the solar race.

85. To be the cause of Samkalpa. ‘conviction,’
‘belief and Vikalpa, ‘doubt,’ ‘disbelief.’ The
Bhagavata indulges in a similar strain and often in
the same words, The whole recalls the words of the
Roman satirist; I, demens et saevas curre per Alpes,
Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias.

KEK

END OF THE FOURTH BOOK
