488

THE VISNU-PURANAM

हत्वा सैन्यमशेषन्तु तस्य दैत्यस्य माधवि:।

सप्त माया व्यतिक्रम्य मायां प्रयुयुजेऽष्टमीम् ॥१८॥
तया जघान तं दैत्यं मायया कालशम्बरम्।

उत्पत्य च तया सार्द्धमाजगाम पितुर्गृहम्॥१९॥
अन्त:पुरे निपत्तितं मायावत्या समन्वितम्।

तं दृष्टवा कृष्णसङ्कल्पा वभूवु: कृष्णयोषित:।॥ २०॥
रुक्मिणी चावदत् प्रेम्णा साश्रुदृष्टिरनिन्दिता।
धन्याया: खल्वयं पुत्रो वर्त्तते नवयौवने।। २१॥

अस्मिन् वयसि पुत्रो मे प्रद्युम्नो यदि जीवति।

सभाग्या जननी Aer! त्वया कापि विभूषिता।। २२॥

अथारा यादृश: स्नेहो मम यादृग् वपुस्तव।

हरेरपत्यं सुव्यक्तं wary वत्स! भविष्यति।। २३॥

When the valiant Pradyumna heard this, he
was filled with wrath, and defied Sambara to
battle. In the conflict that ensued, the son of
Madhava slew the whole host of Sambara.
Seven times, he foiled the delusions of the
enchanter, and making himself master of the
eighth, turned it against Sambara, and killed
him. By the same faculty he aseended into the
air, and proceeded to his father's house, where
he alighted, along with Mayavati, in the inner
apartments. When the women beheld
Pradyumna, they thought it was Krsna
himself:. Rukmini, her eyes dimmed with
tears, spoke tenderly to him, and said, “Happy
is she who has a son like this, in the bloom of
youth. Such would be the age of my son
Pradyumna, if he was alive. Who is the
fortunate mother adorned by you? and yet
from thy appearance, and from the affeetion I
feel for you, you are assuredly the son of
Hari."

WYN उवाच
एतस्मिन्नन्तरे WA: सह HOA नारद:।
अन्त:पुरचरीं देवीं रुक्मिणीं wre हर्षयन्।। २४॥
एष ते तनय: सुभ्रु! हत्वा शम्बरमागत:।
हृतो येनाभवद् बालो भवत्या: सूतिकागृहात्।। २५॥
इयं मायावती भार्या तनयस्यास्य ते सती।
शम्बरस्य न भार्येयं श्रूयतामत्र कारणम्॥ २६॥

मन्मथे तु गते नाशं तदुद्धवपरायणा।

शम्बरं मोहयामास मायारूपेण रूपिणी॥ २७॥

व्यवायाद्यु पभोगेषुरूपं मायामयं शुभम्।

दर्शयामास दैत्यस्य तस्येयं मदिरेक्षणा ।। २८॥

कामोऽवतीर्ण: पुत्रस्ते तस्येयं दयिता रति:।

विशङ्का नात्र कर्त्तव्या स्नुषेयं तव शोभना NSU

wat हर्षसमाविष्टा रुक्मिणी केशवस्तथा।

नगरी च समस्ता सा साधु साध्वित्यभाषत।।३०॥

अवाप विस्मयं सर्वो द्वारवत्यां जनस्तदा॥ ३ १॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे सप्तविंश: अध्याय:।

At this moment Krsna, accompanied by
Narada, arrived; and the latter said to the
delighted Rukmini, "This is your own son,
who has come hither after killing Sambara, by
whom, when an infant, he was stolen from the
lying-in chamber. This is the virtuous
Mayavati, his wife, and not the wife of
Sambara. Hear the reason. When Manmatha,
the deity of love, had perished,’ the goddess of
beauty, desirous to seeure his revival, assumed
a delusive form, and by her eharms fascinated
the demon Sambara, and exhibited herself to
him in various illusory enjoyments. This thy
son is the descended Kama; and this is the
goddess Ratt, his wife.’ There is no oeeasion
for any uncertainty: this is thy daughter-in-
law.”” Then Rukmini was glad, and Kesava
also; the whole city resounded with exclama-
tions of joy, and all the people of Dvaraka
were surprised at Rukmini's recovering a son
who had so long been lost.

NOTES

1 The Bhagavata tells the story in the same
manner, but the Hari Vamsa omits the part of the
fish.

2 When he was reduced to ashes by a fiery
glance from Siva, in resentment of his inflaming
him with passion for Uma. This legend is a
favourite with the Saiva Puranas, and is told in the
Linga and Kalika, also in the Padma Purana. and
Kasi Khanda of the Skanda PUR&anA They do not
say much about his resuscitation however; Siva, in
