BOOK IV, 9

रजिनापि देवसैन्यसहायेन अनेकैर्महास्त्रैस्तदशेषमसुरबलं
निषूदितम्। अवजितारातिपक्षश्च sat रजिचरणयुगल-
मात्मशिरसा निपीड्याह,- भयत्राणदानादस्मत्पिता wary
अशेषलोकानामुत्तमो Wa यस्याहं पुत्रस्रिलोकेन्द्र:।।३॥

Raji therefore joined the heavenly host and
by his numerous and formidable weapons
destroyed the army of their enemies. When the
demons were discomfited, Indra placed the
feet of Raji upon his head and said, "You have
preserved me from a great danger and I
acknowledge you as my father; you are the
sovereign chief over all the regions and I, the
Indra of the three spheres, am your son."

स चापि राजा प्रहस्याह,- एवमेवास्तु, अनतिक्रमणीया
fe वैरिपक्षादप्यनेकविधचाटुवाक्यगर्भा प्रणति, इत्युक्ता
स्वपुरमाजगाम।।४॥ शतक्रतुरपीन्द्रत्वं चकार।

The Raja smiled and said, "Even be it so.
The regard that is conciliated by many
agreeable speeches is not to be resisted even
when such language proceeds from a foe
(much less should the kind words of a friend
fail to win our affection)." He accordingly
returned to his own city and Indra remained as
his deputy in the government of heaven.

waa च owt नारदर्षिचोदिता राजसुता:
शतक्रतुमात्मपितृपुत्रमाचारादू राज्यं याचितवन्त:॥ ५1

अप्रदाने चावजित्येन्द्रमतिबलिन: स्वयमिन्द्रत्वं चक्रु:।
wae aga am व्यतीते बृहस्पतिमेकान्ते
दृष्टापहृतत्रैलोक्य-यज्ञभाग: शतक्रतुराह॥ &

वदरीफलमात्रमप्यर्हसि WA आप्यायनाय पुरोडाशखण्डं
स्यां, तन्मया wed किमकर्त्तव्यमिति।। ७॥
तेषामनुदिनाभिचारिकं बुद्धिमोहाय शक्रस्य च तेजोवृद्धये
जुसाव।

When Raji ascended to the skies, his sons,
at the instigation of Narada, demanded the
rank of Indra as their hereditary right; and as
the deity refused to acknowledge their

supremacy, they reduced him to submission by
force and usurped his station. After some

349

considerable time had elapsed, the god of a
hundred sacrifices, Indra, deprived of his share
of offerings to the immortals, met Brhaspati in
a retired place and said to him, "Cannot you
give me a little of the sacrificial butter, even if
it were no bigger than a jujube, for I am in
want of sustenance?" "If," replied Brhaspati, "I
had been applied to by you before, I could
have done anything for you that you wished;
as it is, I will endeavour and restore you in a
few days to your sovereignty." So saying, he
commenced a sacrifice for the purpose of
increasing the might of Indra and of leading
the sons of Raji into error and so effecting
their downfall.'

a चापि तेन बुद्धिमोहेनाभिभूयमाना ब्रह्मद्विषो धर्मत्यागिनो
वेदवादपराङ्गुखा बभूवु:। ततश्च arta sal
जघान। पुरोहिताप्यायिततेजाश्च त्रिदिवमाक्रामत्। एतविन्द्रस्य
स्वपदच्यवनारोहणं श्रुत्वा पुरुष: स्वपदभ्रंश दौरात्म्यं वा न
चाणोति।

Misled by their mental fascination, the
princes became enemies of the Brahmanas,
regardless of their duties and contemners of
the precepts of the Vedas; and thus devoid of
morality and religion, they were slain by
Indra, who by the assistance of the priest of
the gods resumed his place in heaven.
Whoever hears this story shali retain forever
his proper place and never be guilty of wicked
acts.

रम्भस्त्वनपत्योऽभवत्। क्षत्रवृद्धसुत, प्रतिक्षत्र:, aga:
सञ्जय: ततश्च विजय:, तस्माच्च यलकृत् तस्य
हर्षवर्द्धनसुत: सहदेव:, तस्माददीन:, तस्य जयसेन:, ततश्च
संहुति:) तत्पुत्र: gaat: इत्येते क्षत्रवृद्धस्व। anit
नहुषवंशं वक्ष्यामि इति।। it

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे नवम: Seas: II

Rambha, the third son of Ayus, had no
progeny.” Ksatravrddha had a son named
Pratiksatra’; his son was Sanjaya; his son was
Vijaya;’ his son was Yajfiakrit;> his son was
Harsavarddhana;° his son was Sahadeva; his

son was Adina;’ his son was Jayasena; his son
त त 8
was Sankrti; his son was Ksatradharman.
