474

THE VISNU-PURANAM

offering of viands, or of the remains of a sacrifice,
to all beings; but that cannot be its purport here; nor
is it ever used in the sense of viands in general. The
verb Kalpa or KlIrip also usually implies 'making.'
(17) Maficavata ; ‘in the Samaja,’ or ‘assembly.'
(18) Maharafiga (महारङ्ग) ‘the great place of the
performance.' Rafiga is ‘acting’ or 'representation.'
.also the place or site of it (19) All the copies
consulted, except one, offer an irregularlity of
construction, which, although defended by the
commentators, is a license scarcely allowable. The
epithets of the first verse are all in the plural
number; they then occur in the singular, to agree
with the only substantive in the description,
Samajavata. According to the commentaries, the
plural term Maricds (4a: ) understood is the
substantive to the epithets of the first stanza, and
Samajavata the singular to those of the other verses.
This awkardness is however avoided by the reading
of an old and very good copy, which puts it all in
the singular; as, सचित्राष्टाश्रिचरण: सार्गलद्वारवेदिक: सगवाक्षार्द्धचन्द्रश्च
सतलोत्तमभूषित:। (20) The expression is Charana,
literally ‘foot ;' explained by the commentator,
Stambha, 'post’ or ‘pillar.' (21) The reading of most
of the copies is Sayanottama (शयनोत्तम: ), which may
be taken as the sense of Talottama. ‘couches or
benches with cushions.’ (22) Mancagarais (aarm),
‘temporary houses,’ (23) Or ‘fronting to the east’
(प्राङ् मुखै:). (24) Nirmuktais (निर्मुक्तै): explained by the
commentator to mean ‘fine threads, "network,’ or
‘gauze.’ through which persons, females especially,
may see without being seen. (25) warts व्ययुक्ताभि:
पताकाभि:। (26) "With ridges and projections’ (a
सानुप्रगृहाणि), The commentator explains this, ‘with
flages on the top of them (उपरि`देशे सपताकानि), (27) This
appears to be intended for an epithet of the women,
although Astarana is not usually applied to dreas:
आस्तरणाम्बरै शोभिता चारमुखाभि:। (21) weraérpia चाङ्गेर्य्य:
पानयोजिता:। Phala to course, is ‘fruit? Avadanga is
explained in lexicons, 'what is eaten to excite thirst
:” one comment gives it, ‘what may be sucked,' as
tamarinds, and the like. Changeri is explained,
‘fluids for drinking, made with sorrel, or acid fruits;
` that is, sherbets, (29) उत्तमागारिका or उत्तरागारिका is an
epithet of the Preksdgara, or look-out house of the
women (स्त्रीणां प्रेक्ष्गगृहा:), situated on the tops of their
houses, according to the commentators; गृहोपरि गृहं यत्
तदुत्रमागारं तत्रभवा: प्रेक्ष्गगृहा:। an arrangement very
compatible with the form of Indian houses, which

have flat roofs, commonly enclosed by a trellis
work, or jalousie of masonry. It is observable, that
in the Visnu Purana, and in the Mahabharata, on
various public occasions, the women take their
places on the platforms, or in the pavilions, without
curtains or screens.

5 The terms here used are technical, and refer to
the established modes of wrestling amongst Hindu
athlete. 1. Sannipata (सन्निपात:) is described 'mutual
laying hold of.’ 2. Avaditta (अवदूत: ), ‘letting go of
the adversary.’ 3. Ksepana (91), ‘pulling to, and
casting back.’ 4. Mustinipita (मुष्टिनिपात:), ‘striking
with fists.’ 5. Kilanipdta (कीलनिपात:), ‘striking with
the elbow.’ 6. Vajranipata (वज्रनिपात: ), ‘striking with
the fore-arm.' 7. Janunirghata (जानुनिर्घात: ), ‘pressing
or ‘striking with the knees.’ 8. Bahuvighattana
(बाहुविघट्टनं), “interlacing the arms.’ 9. Padoddhita
(पादोद्धूत), ‘kicking.’ 10. Prasrshta (7481) ‘intertwining
of the whole body.' In some copies another term
occurs, Asgmaoirghata (अश्मनिर्घात:). ‘striking with
stones,’ or, striking blows as hard as with stones;'
for stones could scarcely be used in a contest
specified as ‘onc without weapons' (अशस्त्रं FS)

6 Krsna contended with Chania, ‘who through
distress and anger shook the flowers of his crest;
खेदाच्चालयता कोपान्रिजशेखकेशरं। The two last terms are
explained. 'the flower of the wreath on his head:'
स्वशीर्षापीडभूत पुष्पं।

7. Et latus median sulcus diducit arenam. ‘The
yielding sand being furrowed into a ditch or water-
course, by the dead bodies being dragged over it.
The text is गौरवेणातिमहता परिखा a कृष्यता। कृता कंसस्य देहेन
`वेगेनेव महाम्भस:॥

tek
