BOOK IV, 13

Prasena and Satrajit. The divine Aditya, the
sun, was the friend of the latter.

एकदा त्वम्भोधेस्तीरसंश्रय: gi सत्राजितस्तुष्टाव।
तन्मनस्कतया च भास्वानभिष्टूयमानोऽग्रतस्तस्य तस्थौ,
अस्पष्टमुर्तिधरं चैनमालोक्य war: सूर्य्यमाह,-यथैव
न किञ्चिद्भगवता प्रसादीकृतं विशेषमुपलक्षयामि।। ९॥
इत्येवमुक्ते (भगवता) सूर्य्यण निजकण्ठादुन्मुच्य
स्यमन्तकनामा मणिरवतार्य्य wart न्यस्त:,
ततस्तमाताम्रोज्जवलह्रस्ववपुषम् ईषदापिङ्गलनयनमादित्य-
मद्राक्षीत्। कृतप्रणिपातस्तवादिकञ्च सनत्राजितमाह
भगवान्-वरमस्मत्तोऽभिमतं gid स च wa
मणिरत्नमयाचत। स चापि तस्मै ae दत्त्वा वियति स्वं
धिष्ण्यमारुरोह।। १०॥
सत्राजितोऽप्यमल-मणिरत्नसनाथकण्ठतया सूर्य्य इव
तेजोभिरशेषदिगन्तराण्युद्धासयन् द्वारकां विवेश।। ११॥
द्वारकावसिजनपदस्तु तमायान्तमवेक्ष्य भगवन्तमनादिपुरुषं
पुरुषोत्तममवनिभारावतारणायाशेन मानुषरूपधारिणं
प्रणिपत्याह-भगवन्! भगवन्तमयं नूनं द्रष्टुमायात्यादित्य:
इत्याकर्ण्य wee च तानाह war, नायमादित्य:
ययु:॥ १२॥

a च तं स्यमन्तकाख्यं महामणिमात्मनिवेशने
TAI १३॥

३59

apart and Satrajit beheld him of a dwarfish
stature, with a body like burnished copper and
with slightly reddish eyes. Having offered his
adorations, the sun desired him to demand a
boon and he requested that the jewel might
become his. The sun presented it to him and
then resumed his place in the sky. Having
obtained the spotless gem of gems, Satrajit
wore it on his neck and becoming as brilliant
thereby as the sun himself, irradiating all the
region with his splendour, he returned to
Dvaraké. The inhabitants of that city,
beholding him approach, repaired to the
eternal male, Purusottama, who, to sustain the
burden of the earth, had assumed a mortal
form (as Krsna) and said to him, "Lord,
assuredly the divine sun is coming to visit
you." But Krsna smiled and said, "It is not the
divine sun, but Satrajit, to whom Aditya has
presented the Syamantaka gem and he now
wears it; go and behold him without
apprehension." Accordingly they departed.
Satrajit having gone to his house, there
deposited the jewel, which yielded daily eight
loads of gold and through its marvellous virtue
dispelled all fear of portents, wild beasts, fire,
robbers and famine.

अच्युतोऽपि तद्ररत्नमुग्रसेनस्य भूपतेर्योग्यमेतदिति
लिप्साञ्चके, गोत्रभेदभयाच्च शक्तोऽपि न जहार।। १६॥
सत्राजितोऽप्यच्युतो मामेतद् याचिष्यतीत्यवगतरत्नलोभ:

wafers तन्मणिरलप्रवरमष्ठटौ कनकभारान् स्वभ्रात्रे प्रसेनाय तद्ररत्नं STATIN १७॥

स्रवति।। १४॥
तत्प्रभावाच सकलस्यैव राष्ट्रस्योपसर्गा अनावृष्टि-
व्यालाग्नि-चौरदुर्भिक्षादिभयं न भवति।। १५॥

On one occasion Satrajit, while walking
along the sea shore, addressed his mind to
Strya and hymned his praises; on which the
divinity appeared and stood before him.
Bcholding him in an indistinct shape, Satrdjit
said to the sun, "I have beheld you, lord, in the
heavens as a globe of fire : now do you show
favour unto me, that I may see you in your
proper form." On this the sun taking the jewel
called Syamantaka from off his neck, placed it

तच्च
गुणमुत्पादयति, अन्यथा य एव धारयति, aa हन्तीति।
मृगयामगच्छत्। तत्र च सिंहाद् वधमवाप। साश्वञ्च तं निहत्य
सिंहोऽप्यमलमणिरत्नमास्यग्रेणादाय गन्तुमुद्यत:
ऋक्षाधिपतिना जाम्बवता दृष्टो घातितश्च। जाम्बवानप्यमलं
बालकाय ॥ १८॥

Acyuta was of opinion that this wonderful
gem should be in the possession of Ugrasena;
but although he had the power of taking it
from Satrajit, he did not deprive him of it, that
