88

the ‘calf,’ or Manu in that character, is typified, the
commentator observes, the promoter of the
multiplication of progeny ; प्रजासन्तानप्रवर्त्तक:।

9. The Matsya, Brahma, Bhagavata, and Padma
enter into a greater detail of this milking, specifying
typically the calf, the milker, the milk, and the
vessel. Thus, according to the Matsya, the Rsis
milked the earth through Vrhaspati; their calf was
Soma; the Vedas were the vessel; and the milk was
devotion. When the gods milked the earth, the
milker was Mitra (the sun); Indra was the calf:
superhuman power was the produce. The gods had
a gold, the Pitrs a silver vessel : and for the latter,
the milker was Antaka (death); Yama was the calf;
the milk was Swadha, or oblation. The Naga, or
snake-gods, had a gourd for their pail; their calf
was Taksaka; Dhritarastra (the serpent) was their
milker; and their milk was poison. For the Asuras,
Maya was the milk; Virocana, the son of Prahlada,
was the calf, the milker was Dwimurddha; and the
vessel was of iron. The Yaksus made Vaisravana
their calf; their vessel was of unbaked earth, the
milk was the power of disappearing. The Raksasas
and others employed Raupyanabha as the milker ;
their calf was Sumali: and their milk was blood.
Citraratha was the calf, Vasuruci the milker, of the
Gandharvas and nymphs, who milked fragrant
odours into a cup of lotus leaves. On behalf of the
mountains, Meru was the milker; Himavat the calf;
the pail was of crystal ; and the milk was of herbs
and gems. The trees extracted sap in a vessel of the
Palisa, the Sal being the milker, and the Plaksa the
calf. The descriptions that occur in the Bhagavata,
Padma, and Brahma Puranas are occasionally
slightly varied, but they are for the most part in the
same words as that of the Matsya. These mys-
tifications are all probably — subsequent
modifications of the original simple allegory, which
typified the earth as a cow, who yielded to every
class of beings the milk they desired, or the object
of their wishes.

10. Another reading is दु:स्वप्नोपशमं करोति। ‘It
counteracts evil dreams.’ The legend of Prthu is
briefly given in the Mahabh4rata. Raja Dharma,
and occurs.in most of the Puranas, but in greatest
detail in our text, in the Bhagavata, and especially

in the Padma, Bhumi Khanda. s. 29, 30. All the .

versions, however, are essentially the same.

THE VISNU-PURANAM
