122

THE VISNU-PURANAM

साध्याभावे महाबाहो। साधनै: किं प्रयोजनम्।।३६॥
सर्वभूतात्मके तात! जगन्नाथे जगन्मये।

परमात्मनि गोविन्दे मित्रामित्रकथा कुत:॥ ३७॥
त्वय्यस्ति भगवान् विष्णुर्मयि चान्यत्र चास्ति स:।
यतस्ततोऽयं faa मे शत्रुश्चेति पृथक् कुत: ॥३८॥
तदेभिरलमत्यर्थं दुष्टारम्भोक्तिविस्तरै:। .
अविद्यान्तर्गतैर्यत्न: कर्त्तव्यस्तात।! शोभने॥ ३९॥

विद्यानुद्धिरविद्यायामज्ञानात् तात! जायते।
.बालोऽग्नि किं नं खद्योतमसुरेश्वर! मन्यते॥४०॥

"It is true that ‘J have been instructed in all.
these matters by my venerable preceptor, and I `
have learnt them, but I cannot in all approve -
them. It -is ` said” that. conciliation, gifts,
punishment, and sowing dissension are the
means of seciring friends (or overcoming
foes)'; ‘but I, father—bc not angry-“know
neither friends nor foes, and where no object is
to be accomplished, the means of effecting it
are superfluous. It were idle to talk of friend or
foe in Govinda, who is the supreme soul, lord
of the world, consisting of the world, and who
is identical with all beings. The divine Visnu
is in you, father, in me and in all every where
else; and hence how can I speak of friend or
foe. as distinct from myself? It is therefore
waste of time to cultivate such tedious and
unprofitable sciences, which are but false
knowledge, and all our energies should be
dedicated to the acquirement of true wisdom.
The notion that ignorance is knowledge arises,
father, from ignorance. Does not the child,
king of the Asuru. imagine the firefly to be a
spark of fire?

aq कर्म यन्न बन्धाय सा विद्या या विमुक्तये।
आयासायापरं ant विद्यान्या शिल्पनैपुणम्।।४१॥
तदेतदवगम्याहमसारं सारमुत्तमम्।

निशामय महाभाग। प्रणिपत्य व्रवीमि ते।।४२॥
न चिन्तयति को राज्यं को धनं नाभिवाच्छति।
तथापि भाव्यमेवैतदुभयं प्राप्यते नरै:।। ४३॥

wa wa महाभाग। महत्वं प्रति सोद्यमा:।

तथापि पुंसां भाग्यानि नोद्यमा भूतिहेतव:।॥।४४॥

जडानामविवेकानामसुराणामपि प्रभो।
भोग्यभोज्यानि राज्यानि सन्त्यनीतिमतामपि।। ys
तस्माद् यतेत पुण्येषु य इच्छेन्महतीं श्रियम्।
यतितव्यं समत्वे च निर्वाणमपि Sepa ४६॥
देवा मनुष्या: पशव: पक्षिवृक्षसरीसृपा:।
रूपमेतदनन्तस्य विष्णोर्भिन्नमिव स्थितम्।।४७॥
एतद्विजानता सर्वं जगत् स्थावरजङ्गमम्।
द्रष्टव्यमात्मवद् विष्णुर्यतोऽयं विश्वरूपधृक्।।४८॥
एवं ज्ञाते स भगवाननादि: परमेश्वर:।
प्रसीदत्यत्युक्कास्मिन्प्रसत्रेवलेशसक्षय ॥४९॥

That is active duty, which is not for our
bondage: that is knowledge, which is for our
liberation: all other duty is good only unto
weariness; all other knowledge is only the
cleverness of an artist. Knowing this, I look
upon all such acquirement as profitless. That
which is really profitable hear me, oh mighty
monarch, thus prostrate before you, proclaim.
He who cares not for dominion, he who cares
not for wealth, shall assuredly obtain both in a
life to come. All men. illustrious prince, are
toiling to be great; but the destinies of men,
and not their own exertions, are the cause of
greatness. Kingdoms are the gifts of fate, and
are bestowed upon the stupid, the ignorant, the
cowardly, and those to whom the science of
government is unknown. Let him therefore
who covets the goods of fortune be assiduous
in the practice of virtue: let him who hopes for
fina] liberation learn to look upon all things as
equal and the same. Gods, men, animals, birds,
reptiles, all are but forms of one eternal Visnu,
existing as it were detached from himself. By
him who knows this, all the existing world,
fixed or movable, is to be regarded as identical]
with himself, as proceeding alike from Visnu,
assuming a universal from. When this is
known, the glorious god of all who is without
beginning or end, is pleased; and when he is
pleased, there is an end of affliction."

एतच्छुत्वा तु कोपेन समुत्याय वरासनात्।
` हिरण्यकशिपु: पुत्रं पदा वक्षस्यताडयत्।॥। ५ ०॥
