2१6

THE VISNU-PURANAM

appeared amongst the candidates and again
invested him with the character of her
husband.
SYN च तया WS सम्भोगान्नृपनन्दन:।
पितर्युपरते wet विदेहेषु चकार स:।॥ ८९॥
इयाज यज्ञान् सुबहून् ददौ दानानि चार्थिनाम्।
पुत्रानुत्पादयामास युयुधे च सहारिभि:।॥ ९०॥
राज्यं भुक्त्वा यथान्यायं पालयित्वा वसुन्धराम्।
तत्याज स प्रियान् प्राणान् ATT धर्मतो नृप:॥ ९१॥
ततश्चितास्थं तं भूयो arate सा शुभेक्षणा।

अन्वारुरोह विधिवद् यथापूर्वं ger सती॥ ९२॥

They lived happily together and upon her
father's decease Satadhanu ruled over the
country of Videha. He offered many sacrifices
and gave away many gifts and begot sons and
subdued his enemies in war; and having duly
exercised the sovereign power and cherished
benignantly the earth, he died, as became his
warrior birth, in battle. His queen again
followed him in death and conformably to

sacred preccpts, once more mounted
cheerfully his funeral pile.

ततोऽवाप तया सार्द्ध राजपुत्र्या स पार्थिव:
ऐन्द्रानतीत्य वै लोकान् लोकान् कामदुहोऽक्षयान्।। ९३॥
स्वर्गाक्षयत्वमतुलं दाम्पत्यमतिदुर्लभम्।

wre पुण्यफलं प्राप्य संशुद्धि at faster ९४॥

एष पाषण्डसम्भाषाद्दोष: प्रोक्तो मया द्विज!
तथाश्वमेधावभृथस्नानमाहात्म्यमेव च।। ९५॥

The king then, along with his princess,
ascended beyond the sphere of Indra to the
regions where all desires are forever gratified,
obtaining ever-during and unequalled
happiness in heaven, the perfect felicity that is
the rarely realised reward of conjugal
fidelity." Such, Maitreya, is the sin of
covering with a heretic and such are the
expiatory effects of bathing after the solemn
sacrifice of a horse, as I have narrated them to
you.
तस्मात् पाषण्डिभि: पापैरालापस्पर्शनं त्यजेत्।
विशेषत: क्रियाकाले यज्ञादौ चापि दीक्षित:।। ९६॥

क्रियाहानिर्गृहे यस्य मासमेकं प्रजायते।

तस्यावलोकनात् Ys पश्येत मतिमान् AT Fl
किं पुनर्यैस्तु सत्यक्ता त्रयी सर्वात्मना द्विज!

परान्नभोजिभि: पापैर्वेदवादविरोधिभि:।। ९ ८॥

सहालापस्तु संसर्ग: सहास्या चातिपापिनी।

पाषण्डिभिर्दुराचारैस्तस्मात्ता: परिवर्जयेत्।।९९॥
पष्ठ्ययिडनो त्निकर्मस्थ'न् वैडालव्रतिकाच्छठान्।

हैतुकान् वकवृत्तीश्च वाङ्मात्रेणापि नार्चयेत्।। १० oll

दूरादपास्त: सम्पर्क: सहस्यापि च पापिभि:।

पाषण्डिभिर्दुराचारैस्तस्मात्ता: परिवर्जयेत्।। १० १॥

Let therefor a man carefully avoid the
discourse or contact of क्रा unbeliever,
especially at seasons of devotion and when
engaged in the performance of religious rites
preparatory to a sacrifice. If it be necessary
that a wise man should look at the sun, after
beholding one who has neglected his domestic
ceremonies for a month, how much greater
need must there be of expiation after
encountering one who has wholly abandoned
the Vedas? One who is supported by infidels
or who disputes the doctrines of holy writ? Let
not a person treat with even the civility of
speech, heretics, those who do forbidden acts,
pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics! and
hypocrites. Intercourse with such iniquitous
wretches, even at a distance, all association
with schismatic, defiles; let a man therefore
carefully avoid them.

एते नग्नास्तवाख्याता SEAT श्राद्धोपघातका:।

येषां सम्भाषणात् पुंसां दिनपुपयं प्रणश्यति।। go २॥

These, Maitreya, are the persons called
naked, the meaning of which term you desired
to have explained. Their very looks vitiate the
performance of an ancestral oblation; speaking
to them destroys religious merit for a whole
day.

Ut पाषण्डिन: पापा न ह्येतानालपेद् बुध:।

पुण्यं नश्यति सम्भाषादेतेषां तद्धिनोद्भवम्।। १०३॥

मोघाशिनामखिलशौचनिराकृतानाम्।
