224

विश्वामित्रो भरद्वाज: सप्त सप्तर्षयोऽभवन्।॥। ३ २॥
इक्ष्वाकुश्चैव नाभागो ge: शर्यातिरेव च।
नरिष्यन्तश्च विख्यातो नाभ उद्दिष्ट wa च।। ३३॥
HOYT पृषध्रश्च वसुमान् लोकविश्रुत:।
मनोर्वैवस्वतस्यैते नव पुत्राश्च धार्मिका:॥ ३४॥

The Manu of the present period is the wise
lord of obsequies, the illustrious offspring of
the sun: the deities are the Adityas, Vasus and
Rudras; their sovereign is Purandara: Vasistha,
Kasyapa, Atri, Jamadagni, Gautama,
Visvamitra and Bharadvaja are the seven Rsis:
and the nine pious sons of Vaivasvata Manu
are the kings Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsta,
Sanyati, Narisyanta, Nabhanidista, Karisa,
Prisadhra and the celebrated Vasumat.””

विष्णुशक्तिरनौपम्या सत्त्वोद्रिक्ता स्थितो स्थिता।
मम्वन्तरेष्वशेषेषु देवत्वेनाधितिष्ठति॥ ३५॥

अंशेन तस्य जज्ञेऽसौ यज्ञ: स्वायम्भुवेऽन्तरे।
आकूत्यां मानसो Sa STA: प्रथयेऽन्तरे॥ ३६॥
तत: पुन: स वै देव: प्राप्ते स्वारोचिषेऽन्तरे।
तुषितायां समुत्पन्नो ह्यजितस्तुषितै: सह॥ ३७॥
औत्तमे त्वन्तरे de तुषितस्तु पुन: स वै।
सत्यायामभवत् सत्य: सत्यै: सह सुरोत्तमै:।। ३८॥
तामसस्यान्तरे चैव सम्प्राप्ते पुनरेव हि।

carat हरिभि: ant हरिरेव बभूव ह।। ३९॥
रैवतेऽप्यन्तरे ta: सम्भूत्यां मानसोऽभवत्।
सम्भूतो tad: arg देवैर्देववरो हरि:।॥४०॥
विकुण्ठायामसौ wa aauddad: सह।।४१॥
मन्वन्तरे तु सम्प्राप्ते तथा वैवस्वते द्विज!

वामन: कश्यपाद् विष्णुरदित्यां सम्बभूव TI ४२॥
त्रिभि: क्रमैरिमाँल्लोकाञ्जित्वा येन महात्मना।
पुरन्दराय त्रैलोक्यं दत्तं निहतकण्टकम्॥ ४३॥

The usequalled energy of Visnu combining
with the quality of goodness and effecting the
preservation of created things, presides over
all the Manvantaras in the form of a divinity.

Of a portion of that divinity Yajfia was born in
the Svayambhuva Manvantara, the  will-

THE VISNU-PURANAM
begotten progeny of Akiati.”’ When the
Svarocisa Manvantara had arrived, that divine
Yajfia was born as Ajita, along with the Tusita
gods, the sons of Tusité. In the third
Manvantara, Tusita was again born of Satya,
as Satya, along with the class of deities so
denominated. In the next pcriod, Satya became
Hari, along with the Haris, the children of
Hari. The excellent Hari was again born in the
Raivata Manvantara, of Sambhiiti, as Manasa,
along with the gods called Abhitarajasas. In
the next period, Visnu was born of Vikunthi,
as Vaikuntha. In the present Manvantara, Vis
nu was again born as Vamana, the son of
Kasyapa by Aditi. With three paces he
subdued the worlds and gave them, freed from
all embarrassment, to Purandara.””

इत्येतास्तनवस्तस्य सप्तमन्वन्तरेषु वै।
सप्ताथवाभवन् far! याभि: संवद्भिता: प्रजा:॥४४॥
यस्माद् विश्वमिदं सर्वं तस्य शक्त्या महात्मन:।
तस्माद् स प्रोच्यते विष्णुर्विशोर्धातो: प्रवेशनात्॥४५॥
wa च देवा मनव: समस्ता:

सप्तर्षयो ये मनुसूनवश्च।
इन्द्रश्च योऽयं त्रिदशेशभूतो

विष्णोरशेषास्तु विभूतयस्ता:॥४६॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे प्रथमोऽध्याय:। १॥

These are the seven persons by whom, in
the several Manvantaras, created beings have
been protected. Because this whole world has
been pervaded by the energy of the deity, he is
entitled Visnu, from the root Vis, 'to enter' or
‘pervade’; for all the gods. the Manus, the
seven Rsis, the sons of the Manus, the Indras
the sovereigns of the gods, all are but the
impersonated might of Visnu.”?

KK
NOTES

1. The gods were said to be the Yamas (Bk. I.
Ch. VII); the Rsis were Marici, Angiras, etc. (Bk.
1. Ch. VI. n. 2); and the sons were Priyavrata and
Uttanapada (Bk. I. Ch. VII.). The Vayu adds to the
Yamas, the Ajitas, who share with the former. it
observes, sacrificial offerings. The Matsya, Padma,
