BOOK IV, 6

the wife of Brhaspati, the preceptor of the
gods. In vain Brhaspati sought to recover his
bride; in vain Brahma commanded and the
holy sages remonstrated; Soma refused to
relinquish her. Usanas, out of enmity to
Brhaspati, took part with Soma. ।
साहायमकरोत्॥ ९॥

यतश्चोशना: ततो हि जम्भ-कुजम्भाद्या: समस्ता एव
दैत्यदानवनिकाया महान्तमुद्यमं चक्रु:। बृहस्पतेरपि
सकलदेवसैन्यसहाय: शक्रोऽभवत्।। १०॥

Rudra, who had studied under Angiras, the
father of Brhaspati, befriended his fellow-
student. In consequence of UsSanas, their
preceptor, joining Soma, Jambha, Kujambha
and all the Daityas, Danavas and other foes of
the gods, came also to his assistance; while
Indra and all the gods were the allies of
Brhaspati.

नामाभवत्। ततश्च समस्तशस्त्राण्यसुरेषु रुद्रपुरोगमा देवा
देवेषु चाशेषदानवा मुमुचु:।। ११॥

एवञ्च देवासुराहवक्षोभक्षुब्यहृदयमशेषमेव जगद् ब्रह्माणं
शरण जगाम।। १२॥
TEN १३॥

नैष मम at भवत्यान्यसुतो धार्यस्तदुत्सृजैनमलमति-
agent सा च tage पतिव्रता भर्त्तवचनात्
तमीषिकास्तम्बे गर्भमुत्ससर्ज॥ १४॥

स चोत्सृष्टमात्र वातितेजसा देवानां तेजांस्याचिक्षेप।। १५॥
बृहस्पतिमिन्दुञ्च तस्य कुमारस्यातिचारुतया साभिलाषौ
कथयास्मकमतिसुभगे!। कस्यायमात्मज:,
बृहस्पते: ? इत्युक्तापि सा तारा fear न किञ्चिदुवाच।। १६॥
बहुशोऽप्यभिहिता यदासौ देवेभ्यो are, ad:
कुमारस्तां ? शप्तुमुद्यत:, We Use! अम्ब कस्मान्मम तातं
नाख्यासि, sta तेऽलीकलज्जावत्या: ।
करोमि, यथा नैवमन्याप्यतिमन्थरवचना भवतीति।। १७॥

335
अथ भगवान् पितामहस्तं कुमारं सन्निवार्य्य स्वयमपृच्छत्
aay, कथय aa! कस्यायमात्मज:? सोमस्याथ

बृहस्पते, ? इत्युक्ता लज्जाजड्माह-`सोमस्ये`ति।। १८॥

तत: स्पु ॥
मालिङ्गय Hat साधु ag aca! प्राज्ञोऽसीति बुध इति
ATA THU १९॥

Then there ensued a fierce contest, which,
being on account of Tarakaé (or Tara), was
termed the Tarakamaya or Taraka war. In this
the gods, led by Rudra, hurled their missiles
on the enemy; and the Daityas with equal
determination assailed the gods. Earth, shaken
to her centre by the struggle between such
foes, had recourse to Brahma for protection;
on which he interposed and commanding
Usanas with the demons and Rudra with the
deities to desist from strife, compelled Soma
to restore Tara to her husband. Finding that
she was pregnant, Brhaspati desired her no
longer to retain her burden; and in obedience
to his orders she was delivered of a son, whom
she deposited in a clump of long Mufija grass.
The child, from the moment of its birth, was
endued with a splendour that dimmed the
radiance of every other divinity and both
Brhaspati and Soma, fascinated by his beauty,
claimed him as their child. The gods, in order
to settle the dispute, appealed to Tara; but she
was ashamed and would make no answer. As
she still continued mute to their repeated
applications, the child became incensed and
was about to curse her, saying, "Unless, vile
woman, you immediately declare who is my
father, I will sentence you to such a fate as
shall deter every female in future from
hesitating to speak the truth." On this, Brahma
again interfered and pacified the child; and
then, addressing Tara and said, "Tell me,
daughter, is this the child of Brhaspati or of

. Soma?" "Of Soma,” said Tara, blushing; As

soon as she had spoken, the lord of the
constellations, his countenance bright and
expanding with rapture, embraced his son and
