BOOK V, CHAP. 30

497

सामान्य: सर्व्वलोकानां यद्येषोऽमृतमन्थने।

समुत्पन्न: YU: कस्मादेको गृहणाति वासव:।॥४५॥
यथा सुरा यथैवेन्दुर्यथा श्रीर्वनरक्षिण:।

सामान्या: सर्वलोकस्य पारिजातस्तथा FAYE

भर्त्तबाहुमहागर्वाद् रुणद्धयेनं यथा शची।

तत् कथ्यतामलं क्षान्त्या सत्या हारयति दुमम्।।४७॥

Satyabhima, on hearing these words, was
exceedingly offended, and said, “What right
has Saci—what has Indra—to the Parijata tree? It
was produced at the churning of the ocean as
the common property of all worlds.
Wherefore, gods. should Indra alone possess
it? In the same manner, guardians of the
grove, as nectar, as the moon, as the goddess
Sri herself, so the Parijata tree is the common
property of all the world: and since Saci,
confiding in the-strength of her husband's arm,
would keep it to herself, away with submission
to her: Satya takes away the tree.

कथ्यताञ्च Fa गत्वा पौलोम्या वचनं मम।

सत्यभामा ॥ ४८॥

यदि त्वं दयिता भर्त्तयदि aya: पतिस्तव।

wader gata कारय निवारणम् ॥४९॥

जानामि ते पतिं शक्रं जानामि त्रिदिवेश्वरम्।

पारिजातं तथाप्येन मानुषी हारयामि AG oll

Go quickly, and let Paulomi be told what I
have said: repeat to her this contemptuous
message from Satyabhama; ‘If you are the
beloved wife of your lord. if your husband is
obedient to your authority, let him prevent my
husband from carrying off this tree. I know
your husband Sakra : I know the sovereign of
the divinities; and I, who am a mortal, take
this Parijata tree away from you.”

इत्युक्ता रक्षिणो गत्वा शच्या ऊचुर्यथोदितम्।
शची चोत्साहयामास त्रिदशाधिपति पतिम्॥ ५ १॥
प्रययौ पारिजातार्थमिन्द्रो योधयितुं द्विज।। ५२॥
“तत: परिध-निस्रिंश-गदा-शूल-वरायुधा:।
बभूवुस्रिदशा: सज्जा: शक्रे वज्रकरे स्थिते॥ ५ ३॥

ततो निरीक्ष्य गोविन्दो नागराजोपरि स्थितम्।

शक्रं देवपरीवारं युद्धाय समुपस्थितम्॥ ५४॥

मुमोच शरसङ्घातान् सहस्रायुतश: शितान्।। ५५॥

ततो दिशो asia दृष्टा शरशतैश्चितम्।

मुमुचुस्रिदशा: सर्वे अस्त्रशस्त्राण्यनेकश:।। ५६॥

एकैकमस्त्रं शस्त्रञ्च देवैर्मुक्तं सहस्रधा।

चिच्छेद लीलयैवेशो जगतां मधुसूदन:। ५७॥

Accordingly the warders of the garden
went and reported to Sacit the message of
Satyabhama, Sachi appealed to her husband,
and excited the king of the gods to resent this
affront: and Indra accordingly, attended by the
army of the celestials, marched to attack Hari,
in defence of the Parijata tree. The gods were
armed with clubs, swords, maces, and darts,
and- Indra wielded the thunderbolt. As soon as
Govinda saw the king of the gods advancing
against him on his elephant, attended by the
immortals, he blew his shell so that the sound
filled all the regions, and he showered
smilingly myriads of arrows upon his
assailants. Beholding the air in all directions
overspread with his darts, the celestials in
return hurled innumerable missiles; but every
one of these the destroyer of Madhu and lord
of all worlds, cut playfully into a thousand
pieces with his shafts.

पाशं सलिलराजस्य समाकृष्योरगाशन:।
चकारं खण्डशश्चञ्चवा बालपन्नगदेहवत्॥ ५ ८॥
यमेन wet दण्डं गदाविक्षेपखण्डितम्।

पृथिव्या: पातयामास भगवान् देवकीसुत:॥ ५ ९॥
शिविकाञ्च धनेशस्य चक्रेण तिलशो fay:
want शौरिरर्कञ्च दृष्टिदृष्टहतौजसम्॥६०॥
नीतोऽग्नि: शतशां बाणैर्द्रविता वसवो दिश:।
चक्रविच्छिन्नशूलाग्रा रुद्रा भुवि निपातिता:॥ ६ १॥
साध्या विश्वेऽथ मरुतो गन्धर्वाश्चैव सायकै:।
शाङ्गिणा प्रेरितैरस्ता व्योम्नि शाल्मलितूलवत्।। ६ २॥
गरुत्मानपि वक्तरेण पक्षाभ्यां नखराङ्कुरै:।
भक्षयंस्ताडयन् SAM दारयंश्च चचार वै॥। ६३॥
