60

THE VISNU-PURANAM

तत्पानाद् बलिनो यूयममराश्च भविष्यथ।

तथा चाहं करिष्यामि यथा त्रिदशविद्दिष:।

न प्राप्स्यन्त्यमृतं tat: केवलं क्लेशभागिन:।। ८ ott

To secure the assistance of Daityas, you
must be at peace with them, and engage to
give them an equal portion of the fruit of your
associated toil; promising them, that by
drinking the Amrta that shall be produced
from the agitated ocean, they shall become
mighty an immortal. I will take care that the
enemies of the gods shall not partake of the
percious draught; that they shall share in the
labour alone.”

पराशर उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा देवदेवेन wd wa तत: सुरा:।
सन्धानमसुरै: कृत्वा यत्नवन्तोऽमृतेऽभवन्।। ८ १॥
नानौषधी: समानीय देव-दैतेयदानवा:।
क्षिप्त्वा क्षिराब्धिपयसि शरदभ्रामलत्विषि।। ८ 211

Being thus inscrucccd by the god of gods,
the divinities entered into alliance with the
demons, and they jointly undertook the
acquirement of the beverage of immortality.
They collected various kinds of medicinal
herbs, and cast them into the sea of milk, the
waters of which were radiant as the thin and
shining clouds of autumn.

मन्थानं मन्दरं क्रृत्वा नेत्रे Hear च वासुकिम्।

त्ततो मथितुमारब्धा मैत्रैय तरसामृतम्॥ ८३॥
विबुधा: सहिता: wa यत: Yes तत: कृता:।
कृष्णेन वासुकेर्दैत्या: पूर्वकाये निवेशिता:॥ ८४॥
ते तस्थ फणनि:श्वास-वह्निनापहतत्विष:।
निस्तेजसोऽसुरा: सर्वे बभुवुरमितद्युते॥। ८ ५॥
AAT मुखनि:श्वास-वायुनास्तबलाहकै:।
पुच्छप्रदेशे वर्षद्भिस्तथा चाप्यायिता: सुरा:।॥८६॥
क्षीरोदमध्ये भगवान् कूर्म्मरूपी स्वयं aft:
मन्थनाद्रेरधिष्ठानं भ्रमतोऽभून्महामुने।। ८७॥

They then took the mountain Mandara for
the staff; the serpent Vasuki for the cord; and
commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrta.
The assembled gods were stationed by Krsna

at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas and
Danavas at its head and neck. Scorched by ‘the
flames emitted from his inflated hood. the
demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the
clouds driven towards his tail by the breath of
his mouth, refreshed the gods with revivifying
showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari
himself, in the form of a tortoise, served as a
pivot for the mountain, as it was whirled
around.

रूपेणान्येन देवानां मध्ये चक्रगदाधर:।

चकर्षं भोगिराजानं दैत्यमध्येऽपरेण च।। ८ ८॥

उपर्य्यक्रान्तवान् शैलं बृहद्रूपेण केशव:।

त्तथापरेण मैत्रेय यन्न दृष्टं सुरासुरै:।। ८९॥

अन्येन तेजसा देवान् उपबृंहितवान् विभु:। ९०॥`

The holder of the mace and discus was
present in other forms amongst the gods and
demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of
the serpent race: and in another vast body he
sat upon the summit of the mountain. With
one portion or his energy, unseen by gods or

demons, he sustained the serpent king; and
with another, infused vigour into the gods.

मथ्यमाने ततस्तस्मिन् क्षीराब्यौ देवदानवै:।

हविर्धामाभवत् ya सुरभि: सुरपूजिता।। ९ १॥

TYNE ततो देवा दानवाश्च महामुने।

व्याक्षिप्तचेतसश्चैव बभूवुस्तिमितेक्षणा:।॥ ९ २॥

किमेतदिति सिद्धानां दिवि चिन्तयतां तत:।

बभूव वारुणी देवी मदाधूरणितलोचना।। ९३॥

From the ocean, thus churned by the gods
and Danavas, first uprose the cow Surabhi. the
fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the
divinities, and beheld by them and _ their
associates with minds disturbed, and eyes
glistening with delight. Then. as the holy
Siddhas in the sky wondered what this could
be, appeared the goddess Varuni (the deity of
wine), her eyes rolling with intoxication.

PASTA TARA क्षीरोदाद् वासयन् जगत्।
TRE पारिजातोऽभूद् देवस्त्रीनन्दनस्तरू:।॥ ९४॥
