BOOK IV, 7

343

Mahabharata Matsya Agni Kirm Bhagavata

Ayus Ayus Ayus Ayus_ Ayus
Dhimat Dhrtimat Dhimat Mayus Srutdyus
Améavasu Vasu Vasu Amayus Satydyus
Dridhayus Drdhayus Usrayus Visvayus Raya
Vanayus DhanayusAntaéyus Satdyus Vijaya
Satayus Satayus Satiyus Srutayus Jaya

Asvayus Ritayus
Divijata Divijata

The list of the Brahma is that of the
Mahabharata, with the addition of Satayus and
Visvayus; and the Padma agrees with the Matsya.

2. Son of Vijayu : Bhagavata. This line of
princes is followed only in our text, the Vayu,
Brahma and Hari Varga and the Bhagavata.

3. Kancanaprabha : Brahma.

4. Hotraka : Bhagavata.

5. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varhsa add of
this prince, that he was the husband of Kaveri, the
daughter of Yuvanasva, who by the imprecation of
her husband became the Kaveri river : another
indication of the Daksina origin of these works.
The Hari Varhsa has another Jahnu, to whom it
gives the same spouse, as we shall hereafter see.

6. Sunuta ; Brahma. Puri ; Bhagavata.

7. Valaka : Brahma. Ajaka : Bhagavata.

8. The Brahma Purana and Hari Varga add that
Kiisa was in alliance with the Pahlavas and
foresters.

9. Our authorities differ as to these names :

Vayu Brahma and Hari Vamsa Bhagavata
Kusasva or
Kusasthamba Kusasva Kusamba
Kusandbha Kusanabha Kusanabha
Amurttarayasa Amurttimat Amurttaraya
Vasu Kusika Vasu

The Ramayana has Kusamba, Kusandabha,

Amurttarajasa and Vasu; and makes them severally
the founders of Kausambi, of Mahodaya (which
afterwards appears the same as Kanou)j),
Dharmaranya and Girivraja; the latter being in the
mountainous part of Magadha. I. s. 29.

10. The Brahma and Hari Varhsa make Gadhi
the son of Kusika; the Vayu and Bhagavata, of
Kusamaba : the Ramayana, of Kusanabha.

11. The Ramayana notices the marriage, but has
no legend. The Mahabharata, Vana Parva, has a
rather more detailed narration, but much the same
as in the text. According to the commentator,

ASvatirtha is in the district of Kanouj; perhaps at
the confluence of the Kalanadi with the Ganges.
The agency of the god of Ocean in procuring
horses, is a rather curious additional coincidence
between Varuna and Neptune.

12. In the Mahabharata, Bhrgu, the father of
Rcika, prepares the Cari.

13. So the Ramayana, after stating that Satyavati
followed her husband in death, adds, that she
became the Kausiki river; the Kosi, which, rising in
Nepal, flows through Pirnia into Ganges, opposite
nearly to Rajamahal.

14. The text omits the story of Parasurama, but
as the legend makes a great figure in the Vaisnava
works in general. I have inserted it from the
Mahabharata, where it is twice related once in the
Vana Parva and once in the Rajadharma section of
the Santi Parva. It is told also at length in the ninth
book of the Bhagavata, in the Padma and Agni
Puranas.

15. The circumstances of Ricika's marriage and
the birth of Jamadagni and Visvamitra, are told
much in the same manner as in our text both in the
Mahabharata and Bhagavata.

16. In the beginning of the legend occurs the
account of Karttaviryarjuna, with the addition that
he oppressed both men and gods. The latter
applying to Visnu for succour, he descended to
earth and was born as Parasurama, for the especial
purpose of putting the Haihaya king to death.

17. In the Rajadharma the sons of the king carry
off the calf. The Bhagavata makes the king seize
upon the cow, by whose aid Jamadagni had
previously entertained Arjuna and all his train ;
borrowing, no doubt, these embellishments from
the similar legend of Vasistha and Visvamitra,
related in the Ramayana.

18. The characteristic weapon of Rama, is
however an axe (Paragu), when his name Rama,
‘with the axe.' It was given to him by Siva, whom
the hero propitiated on mount Gandhamadana. He
at the same time received instruction in the use of
weapons generally and the art or war. Rajadharma.

19. This more than 'thrice slaying of the slain’ is
explained in the Rajadharma to mean, that he killed
the men of so many generations, as fast as they
grew up to adolescence.

20. It is sometimes read Narotsedha, ‘as high as a

man. ॥
