BOOK V, CHAP. 3

CHAPTER 3
तृतीयोऽध्याय:
(भगवत आविर्भाव:, योगमायाद्दारा कंसस्य THAT च)
एवं संस्तूयमाना सा देवैर्दैवमधारयत्।
गर्भेण पुण्डरीकाक्षं जगतस्त्राणकारणम्।। BI

aya सर्वलोकस्य कौमुदी शशिनो यथा॥३॥
सन्त: सन्तोषमधिकं प्रशमं चण्डमारुत:।
were निम्नगा याता जायमाने जनार्द्दने॥४॥
सिन्धवो निजशब्देन वाद्यं चक्रुर्मनोहरम्।
जगुर्गन्धर्वपतयो ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा:।।५॥
ससृजु: पुष्पवर्षाणि देवा भुव्यन्तरीक्षगा:।
जज्वलुश्चाग्नय: शान्ता जायमाने जनार्द्दने॥ ६॥

421

मध्यरात्रेऽखिलाधारे जायमाने जनार्द्दने।
मन्द्रं जगर्जुर्जलदा: पुष्पवृष्टिमुचो द्विज।।७॥

Thus eulogiscd by the gods, Devaki bore in
her womb the lotus-eyed deity, the protector of
the world. The sun of Acyuta rose in the dawn
of Devaki to cause the lotus petal of the
universe to expand. On the day of his birth the
quarters of the horizon were irradiate with joy,
as it moonlight was diffused over the whole
earth. The virtuous experienced new delight,
the strong winds were hushed and the rivers
gilded tranquilly, when Janarddana was about
to be born. The seas with their own melodious
murmurings made the music, while the spirits
and the nymphs of heaven danced and sang :
the gods, walking the sky, showered down
flowers upon the earth and the holy fires
glowed with a mild and gentle flame. At
midnight, when the supporter of all was about
to be born, the clouds-emitted low pleasing
sounds and poured down rain of flowers.

फुल्लेन्दीवरपत्राभं चतुर्बाहुमुदीक्ष्य तम्।

श्रीवत्सवक्षसं जातं तुष्टावानकटुन्दुभि:।। ८॥

अभिष्टूयं च त्तं वाग्भि: प्रसन्नाभिर्महामति:।

विज्ञापयामास तदा कंसाद्भीमो द्विजोत्तम:।॥ ९॥

As soon as Anakadundubhi beheld the
child, of the complexion of the lotus leaves,
having four arms and the mystic mark Srivatsa
on his breast, he addressed him in terms of

love and reverence and represented the fears
he entertained of Karhsa.

agea sara
ज्ञातोऽसि देवदेवेशं ! शङ्ख-चक्र-गदाधर।
दिव्यरूपमिदं देव प्रसादेनोपसंहर।। १०॥
अद्यैव देव! कंसोऽयं कुरुते मम घातनम्।
अवतीर्णे इति ज्ञात्वा त्वमस्मिन् मम मन्दिरे॥। ११॥

१४० are borm,’’ said Vasudeva, ‘‘O
sovereign god of gods, bearer of the shell, the
discus and the mace; but now in mercy
withhold this your celestial form, for Karhsa
will assuredly put me to death when he knows
that you have descended in my dwelling.”’
