386

THE VISNU-PURANAM

brother. When the Brahmanas arrived at the
hermitage of Devapi, they informed him, that,
according to the doctrines of the Vedas,
succession to a kingdorh was the right of the
elder brother : but he entered into discussion
with them and in various ways advanced
arguments which had the defect of being
contrary to the precepts of the Vedas. When
the Brahmanas heard this, they turned to
Santanu and said, "Come hither, Raja; you
need give yourself no further trouble in this
matter; the dearth is at an end; this man is
fallen from his state, for he has uttered words
of disrespect to the authority of the eternal,
uncreated Veda; and when the elder brother is
degraded, there is no sin in the prior espousals
of his junior." Santanu thereupon returned to
his capital and administered the government as
before, and his elder brother Devapi being
degraded from his caste by repeating doctrines
contrary to the Vedas, Indra poured down
abundant rain, which was followed by
plentiful harvests.”

वाह्लीकस्य सोमदत्त: पुत्रोऽभूत्। सोमदत्तस्यापि भूरि-

मातुर्वचनमनतिक्रमणीयमिति विघिव्रन्नीर्य्यक्षेत्रे धृत्तराष्ट्र-पाण्डू
तत्प्रहितभुजिष्यायाञ्च विदुरमुतपादयामास।। १०॥

दुरय्येधन-ढु:शासनादिप्रधानं पुत्रशतं
पाण्डोरप्यरण्ये

पञ्च पुत्रा: सप्रुत्यादिता॰ग्वेषाद्रौपद्यापञ्चप्रुत्राष्णु॰।
श्रुतकीर्तिरर्जुनात्, शतानीको नकुलात्, qaearat सहदेवात्।
अपरे चपाण्डवानामात्मजा:, तद्यथा-यौधेयी

देवकं पुत्रमवापा हिडिम्बा घटोत्कचं भीमसेनात् पुत्रमवाप।
काशी च भीमसेनादेव सर्वत्रगं पुत्रमवाप। सहदेवाच्च विजया
सुहोत्रं नाम पुत्रं mead करेणुमयाञ्च नकुलोऽपि
निरमित्रमजीजनत्। अर्जुनस्याप्युलूप्यां नागकन्यायामिरावान्
नाम पुत्रोऽभूत। मणिपुरपतिपुत्र्याञ्च पुत्रिकाधर्म्मण ay वाहनं
नाम पुत्रमाजीजनत्।। ११॥

॥ १२॥

ast साम्प्रतमेतद् भूमण्डलमखण्डितायति Tl
पालयतीति॥ १३॥
इति श्रीविष्णुषुराणे चतुर्थाशे विंश: अध्याय:॥

The son of Bahlika was Somadatta, who
had three sons, Bhori, Bhotigravas and Sala.
The son of Sdntanu was the illustrious and
learned Bhisma, who was born to him by the
holy river-goddess, Ganga; and he had by his
wife Satyavati two sons, Citrangada and
Vicitravirya. Citrangada, while yet a youth,
was killed in a conflict with a Gandharva, also
called Citrangada. Vicitravirya married Amba
and Ambalika, the daughters of the king of
Kasi; and indulging too freely in connubial
rites, fell into a consumption, of which he
died. By command of Satyavati, my son Krs
na- “dvaipayana, ever obedient to his mother's
wishes,’ begot upon the widows of his brother
the princes Dhrtarastra and Pandu and upon a
female servant, Vidira. Dhrtarastra had
Duryodhana, Duhsdsana and other sons, to the
number of a hundred. Pandu having incurred
the curse of a deer, whose mate he had killed
in the chase, was deterred from procreating
children; and his wife Kunti bore to him in
consequence three sons, who were begotten by
the deities Dharma, Vayu and Indra, namely,
Yudhisthira, Bhima and Arjuna : and his wife
Madri had two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, by
the celestial sons of Asvini. These had each a
