BOOK {, CHAP. 9

57

with the feeble and unfortunate divinities; and
Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight,
fled for refuge to Brahma, preceded by the god
of flame (Hutasana). When the great father of
the universe had heard all that had come to
pass, he said to the deities,

ब्रह्मोवाच
परापरेशं शरणं व्रजध्वमसुरार्ददनम्।
उत्पत्तिस्थितिनाशानामहेतुं हेतुमीश्वरम्॥ ३ ५॥
प्रथानपुंसोरजयो: कारणं कार्यभूतयो:।। ३६॥
प्रणतार्तिहरं विष्णुं स व: श्रेयो विधास्यति।

Brahma said— “Repair for protection to the
god of high and low, the tamer of the demons,
the causeless cause of creation, preservaction,
and destruction; the progenitor of the
progenitors; the immortal, unconquerable Vis
nu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his
unengendered products; the remover of the
grief of all who humble themselves before
him: he will give you aid."

एवमुक्त्वा सुरान् सर्वान् gen लोकपितापह:।
क्षीरोदस्योत्तरं att ata सहितो atu ३७॥
स गत्वा त्रिदशै: wed: समवेत: पितामह:।
तुष्टाव वाग्भिरिष्टाभि: परापरपति हरिम्।।३८॥

Having thus spoken to the deities. Brahma
proceeded along with them to the northern
shore of the sea of milk; and with reverential
words thus prayed to the supreme Hari;

बह्मोवाच
नमाम सर्वं सर्वेशमनन्तमजमव्ययम्।
लोकधामधराधारमप्रकाशमभेदिनम्।। ३ ९॥
नारायणमणीयांसमशेषाणामणीयसाम्।
समस्तानां गरिष्ठं यद् भूरादीनां गरीयसाम्॥४०॥
wa wd यत: सर्वमुत्पन्नं सत्पुर:सरम्।
सर्वभूतश्च यो देव: पराणामपि य: पर:॥४१॥
Ul: परस्मात् पुरुषात् परमात्मस्वरूपधृक।
योगिभिश्चिन्त्यते यौऽसौ मुक्तिहेतुर्मुमुक्षुभि:।। ४ २॥
सत्तादयो न सन्तीशे यत्र च WHAT गुणा:।

स Ys: सर्वशुद्धेभ्य: पुमानाद्य: प्रसीदतु॥४३॥

Brahma said— "We glorify him who is all
things, the lord supreme over all, unborn,
imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones
of creation; the unperceived, indivisible
Narayana, the smallest of the smallest, the
largest of the largest of the elements; in whom
are all things, from whom are all things; who
was before existence; the god who is all
beings, who is the end of ultimate objects, who
is beyond final spirit, and is one with supreme
soul; who is contemplated as the cause of final
liberation by sages anxious to be free; in
whom are not the qualities of goodness,
foulness, or darkness, that belong to
undeveloped nature. May that purest of all
pure spirits this day be propitious to us.

कला-काष्ठा-निमेषादिकालसूत्रस्य गोचरे।

यस्य शक्तिर्न शुद्धस्य प्रसीदतु स नो हरि:॥४४॥
प्रोच्यते परमेशो हि य: शुद्धोऽप्युपचारत:।
प्रसीदतु स नो विष्णुरात्मा य: सर्वदेहिनाम्।४५॥

May that Hari be propitious to us, whose
inherent might is not an object of the
progressive chain of moments or of days, that
make up time. May he who is called the
supreme god, who is not in need of assistance,
Hari, the soul of all embodied substance, be
favourable unto us.

य: कारणञ्च कार्यञ्च कारणस्यापि कारणम्।
कार्यस्यापि च य: कार्यं प्रसीदतु स नो हरि:।।४६॥
कार्यकार्यस्य य: art तत्कार्यस्यापि य: स्वयम्।

तत्कार्यकार्यभूतो यस्ततश्च प्रणता: स्म ALN VII

May that Hari, who is both cause and
effect; who is the cause of cause, the effect of
effect; he who is the effect of successive
effect: who is the effect of the effect of the
effect himself; the product of the effect of the
effect of the effect, or elemental substance; to
him I bow.’

कारणं कारणस्यापि AA कारणकारणम्।
तत्कारणानां SG AT प्रणता: स्म सुरेश्वरम्॥४८॥
भोक्तारं भोज्यभूतञ्च Bet सृष्टमेव च।

ard कर्म्मस्वरूपं तं प्रणता: Br परं wa Sei
