230

अग्निबाहु: शुचि: शुक्रो मागघोऽग्निध्र एव च।
युक्तस्तथाऽजितेश्चान्यो मनुपुत्रानत: शृणु॥४२॥
PSMA मनोस्तस्य सुता नृपा:।

कथिता मुनिशार्दूल।! पालयिघ्यन्ति ये महीम्॥४३॥

In the fourteenth Manvantara, Bhautya will
be the Manu"’; Suci, the Indra: the five classes
of gods will be the Caksusas, the Pavitras,
Kanisthas, Bhrajiras and Vavriddhas: the
seven Rsis will be Agnibahu, Suci, Sukra,
Magadha, Grdhra, Yukta and Ajita: and the
sons of the Manu will be Uru, Gabhira,
Bradhna and others, who will be kings and
will rule over the earth.”

चतुर्युगान्ते वेदानां जायते किल विप्लव:।
प्रवर्तयन्ति तानेत्य भुवि सप्तर्षयो: दिव:।।४४॥
कृते Ha स्मृतेर्विप्र! प्रणेता जायते मनु:।

देवा यज्ञभुजस्ते तु यावन्मन्वन्तरन्तु तत्।४५॥
भवन्ति ये मनो: पुत्रा यावन्मन्वन्तरन्तु तै:।
तदन्वयोद्भवैश्चैव तावद्भू: परिपाल्यते॥४६॥
मनु: सप्तर्षयो देवा भूपालाश्च मनो: सुता:।
मन्वन्तरे भवन्त्येते शक्रश्चैवाधिकारिण:।। ४७॥

At the end of every four ages there is a
disappearance of the Vedas and it is the
province of the seven Rsis to come down upon
earth from heaven to give them currency
again. In every Krta age the Manu (of the
period) is the legislator or author of the body
of law, the Smrti: the deities of the different
classes receive the sacrifices during the
Manvantaras to which they severally belong:
and the sons of the Manu themselves and their
descendants, are the sovereigns of the earth for
the whole of the same term. The Manu, the
seven Rsis, the gods, the sons of the Manu,
who are the kings and Indra, are the beings
who preside over the world during each
Manvantara.

चतुर्दशभिरेतैस्तु गतैर्मन्वन्तरैर्दिज।
सहस्रयुगपर्यन्त: कल्पो नि:शेष उच्यते॥४८॥
तावत्प्रमाणा च fren ततो भवति सत्तम।

ब्रह्मरूपधर: WA शेषाहावम्बुसम्प्लवे॥४९॥

THE VISNU-PURANAM

त्रैलोक्यमखिलं wear भगवानादिकृद fay:

स्वमायासंस्थितो विप्र सर्वभूतो जनार्देन:।। ५०॥

तत: प्रबुद्धो भगवान् यथा we तथा पुन:।

Ble करोत्यव्ययात्मा कल्पे Hed रजोगुण:।॥ ५ १।।

मनवो भूभुज: Vay देवा: सप्तर्षयस्तथा।

सात्विकोऽंश: स्थितिकरो जगतो द्विजसत्तम॥ ५ २॥

चतुर्युगेऽप्यसौ विष्णु: स्थितिव्यापारलक्षण:।

युगव्यवस्थां कुरुते यथा HT! तच्छृणु॥ ५३॥

An entire Kalpa, oh Brahmana, is said to
comprise a thousand ages or fourteen
Manvantaras;"? and it is succeeded by a night
of similar duration; during which, he who
wears the form of Brahma, Janardana, the
substance of all things, the lord of all and
creator of all, involved in his own illusions
and having swallowed up the three spheres,
sleeps upon the serpent Sesa, amidst the
ocean." Being after that awake, he, who is the
universal soul, again creates all things as they
were before, in combination with the property
of foulness (or activity): and in a portion of his
essence, associated with the property of
goodness, he, as the Manus, the kings, the
gods and their Indras, as well as the seven Rs
is, is the preserver of the world. In what
manner Visnu, who is characterised by the
attribute of providence during the four ages,
effected their preservation, I will next,
Maitreya, explain.

कृते युगे परं ज्ञानं कपिलादिस्वरूपधृक्।

ददाति सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतहिते रत:॥ ५४॥
चक्रवर्तिस्वरूपेण त्रेतायामपि स प्रभु:।

दुष्टानां निग्रहं कुर्वन् परिपाति जगत्रयम्॥५५॥

करोति बहुलं भूयो वेदव्यासस्वरूपधृक्।। ५६॥
कल्किस्वरूपी दुर्वृत्तान् मार्गे स्थापयति प्रभु:॥ ५७॥
एवमेष जगत् सर्वं परिपाति करोति च।

हन्ति चान्तेष्वनन्तात्मा नास्त्यस्मादू व्यतिरेकि यत्।।५८॥
