BOOK V, CHAP. 20

Do you not notice Balabhadra, dressed in a
blue garment; his countenance as fair as the
jasmine, as the moon, as the fibres to the lotus
seem? See how he gently smiles at the
gestures to Mustika and Caniira, as they spring
up. And now behold Hari advance to
encounter Canara. What I are there no elders,
judges of the field? How can the delicate form
of Hari, only yet in the dawn of adolescence,
be regarded as a match for the vast and
adamantine bulk of the great demon ? Two
youths, of light and elegant persons, are in the
arena, to oppose athlelic fiends, headed by the
cruel Canira. This is a great sin in the judges
of the games, for the umpires to suffer a
contest between boys and strong men.”

पराशर sara
इत्यं पुरस्त्रीलोकस्य वदतश्चालयन् भुवम्।
AAT बद्धकक्षोऽन्तर्जनस्य भगवान् हरि:॥ ५ १॥
बलभद्रोऽपि चास्फोट्य ववल्ग ललितं यदा।
पदे पदे तदा भूमिर्यन शीर्णां तदद्भुतम्।। ५ २॥
चाणूरेण तदा कृष्णो युयुधेऽमितविक्रम:।
नियुद्धकुशलो दैत्यो बलभद्रेण मुष्टिक:।।५३॥
सन्निपातावधूतैस्तु चाणूरेण समं हरि:।
क्षेपणैर्मुष्टिभिश्चैव कीलवज्रनिपातनै:।। ५४॥
जानुभिश्चाश्मनिर्घातैस्तथा बाहुविघट्टितै:।
पादोद्धूतै: प्रसृष्टैश्च तयोर्युद्धंमभून्महत्।। ५५॥
अशस्त्रमतिघोरं तत् तयोर्युद्धं सुदारुणम्।
बलप्राणविनिष्पाद्यं समाजोत्सवसन्निधौ॥ ५ ६॥
यावद् यावच चाणूरो युयुधे हरिणा Tel
प्राणहनिमवापाग्यां तावत्तावल्लवाललवम्॥ ५७॥
कृष्णोऽपि युयुधे तेन लीलयैव जगन्मय:।
STATA कोपान्निजशेखरकेशरम्। ५ ८॥
बलक्षयं विवृद्धिञ्च दृष्टवा चाणूरकृष्णयो:।
वारयामास तूर्याषु कंस: कोपपरायण:॥ ५ ९॥
मृदङ्गादिषु तूर्येषु प्रतिषिद्धेषु ततक्षणात्।
खे सङ्गतान्यवाद्यन्त देवतूर्याण्यनेकश:।।
जय गोविन्द! चाणूरं जहि Sera! दानवम्।
इत्यन्तर्द्धनगा देवास्तदोचुरतिहर्षिता:॥ ६ ०॥

469

चाणूरेण चिरं कालं क्रीडित्वा मधुसूदन:।
उत्पाट्य भ्रामयामास तद्दधाय कृतोद्यम:।। ६ १॥
भ्रामयित्वा शतगुणं दैत्यमल्लममित्रजित्।
भूस्वास्फोटयामास गगने गतजीवितम्॥ ६ २॥
भूमावास्फोटतस्तेन चाणूर: शतधाव्रजत्।
रक्तस्राव-महापङ्कां चकार स तदा भुवम्।। ६३॥
वबलदेवोऽपि तत्कालं मुष्टिकेन महाबल:।
युयुधे दैत्यमल्लेन चाणूरेण यथा हरि:॥ ६४॥

सोऽप्येनं मुष्टिना मूद्ध्नि वक्षस्याहत्य जानुना।
पातयित्वा धरापृष्ठे निष्पपेष गातयुषम्॥६५॥

As thus the women of the city conversed
with one another, Hari, having tightened his
girdle, danced in the ring, shaking the ground
on which he told, Balabhadra also danced,
slapping his arms in defiance. Where the
ground was firm, the invincible Krsna con-
tended foot to foot with Cantira. The practised
demon Mustika was opposed by Balabhadra.
Mutually entwining, and pushing, and pulling,
and beating each other with fists, arms, and
elbows, pressing each other with their knees,
interlacing their arms, kicking with their feet,
pressing with their whole weight upon one
another, fought Hari and C4niira. Desperate
was the struggle, though without weapons, and
one for life and death, to the great gratification
of the spectators. In proportion as the contest
continued, so Canira was gradually losing
something of his original vigour, and the
wreath upon his head trembled from his fury
and distress®; whilst the world-comprehending
Krsna wrestled with him as if but in sport.
Beholding C4nira losing, and Krsna gaining
strength, Kansa, furious with rage,
commanded the music to cease. As soon as the
drums and trumpets were silenced, a numerous
band of heavenly instruments was heard in the
sky, and the gods invisibly exclaimed,
“Victory to Govinda! Kesava, kill the demon
Cantira! Madhustidana having for a long time
dallied with his adversary, at last lifted him
up, and whirled him round, with the intention
of putting an end to him. Having whirled
