344

THE VISNU-PURANAM

21. The story, as told in the Rajadharma section
adds, that when Rama had given the earth to
Kasyapa, the latter desired him to depart, as there
was no dwelling for him in it and to repair to the
sea-shore of the south, where Ocean made for him
(or relinquished to him) the maritime district named
Surparaka. The traditions of the Peninsula ascribe
the formation of the coast of Malabar to this origin
and relate that Parasurama compelled the ocean to
retire and introduced Brahmanas and colonists from
the north into Kerala or Malabar. According to
some accounts he stood on the promontory of Delhi
and shot his arrows to the south, over the site of
Kerala. It seems likely that we have proof of the
local legend being at least as old as the beginning
of the Christian era, as the mons Pyrrhus of
Ptolemy is probably the mountain of Parasu or
Parasurama. See Catalogue of Mackenzie
Collection, Introd. P. xcv. And vol. JI. P. 74. The
Rajadharma also gives an account of the Ksatriyas
who escaped even the thrice seven times repeated
destruction of their race. Some of the Haihayas
were concealed by the earth as women; the son of
Viduratha, of the race of Puri, was preserved in the
। Rksa mountain, where he was nourished by the

bears; Sarvakarman, son of Saudasa, was saved by
Parasara, performing the offices of a Sidra; Gopti,
son of Sivi, was nourished by cows in the forests;
Vatsa, the son of Pratarddana, was concealed
amongst the calves in a cow-pen; the son of
Deviratha was secreted by Gautama on the banks of
the Ganges; Vrhadratha was preserved in
Gridhrakita; and descendants of Marutta were
saved by the ocean. From these the lines of kings
were continued; but it does not appear from the
ordinary lists that they were ever interrupted. This

legend however, as well as that of the Ramayana, b..

I. c. 52, no doubt intimates a violent and protracted
struggle betwcen the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas for
supreme domination in India, as indeed the text of
the Mahabharata more plainly denotes, as Earth is
made to say to Kagyapa. 'The fathers add
grandfathers of these Ksatriyas have been killed by
the remorseless of Rama in warfare on my account
wast पितरश्चैव तथैवच पितामहा:। sed निहता ae
रामेणाक्लिष्टकर्म्मणा।।

22. The story of Sunahgephas in told by different
authorities, with several variations. As the author of
various Stktas in the Rk, he is called the son of
Ajigartta. The Ramayana makes him the middle son
of the sage Rcika, sold to Ambarisa, king of

Ayodhya, by his parents, to be a victim in a human
sacrifice offered by that prince. He is set at liberty
by Visvamitra, but it is not added that he was
adopted. The Bhagavata concurs in the adoption,
but makes Sunahgephas the son of Visvamitra's
sister, by Ajigartta or the sacrifice of Hariscandra
(see n. 9. Bk. IV. Ch. IID). The Vayu makes him a
son of Rcika, but a!'udes to his being the victim at
Harigcandra's sacrifice. According to the
Ramayana, Visvamitra called upon his sons to take
the place of Sunahsephas and on their refusing,
degradcd them to the condition of Candalas. The
Bhagavata says, that fifty only of the hundred sons
of Vigvamitra were expelled from their tribe, for
refusing to acknowledge Sunahgephas or Devarata
as their elder brother. The others consented; and the
Bhagavata expresses this; 348 मन्त्रदृशं aa
स्म हि। 'They said to the elder, profoundly versed in
the mantras. We are your followers:' as the
commentator; अनुगन्तार: कनिष्ठा स्म इत्यर्थ:। The
Ramayana also observes, that Sunahéephas, when
bound, praised Indra with Rcas or hymns of the
Rgveda. The origin of the story therefore, whatever
may be its correct version, must be referred to the
Vedas; and it evidently alludes to some innovation
in the ritual, adopted by a part only of the Kausika
families of Brahmanas.

23. The Bhagavata says one hundred sons,
besides Devarata and others, as Astaka, Harita.
Much IJonger lists of names are given in the Vayu,
Bhagavana, Brahma and Hari Varhsa. The two
latter specify the mothers. Thus Devasravas, Kati
(the founder of the Katyayanas) and Hiranyaksa
were sons of Silavati; Renuka, Galava, Sankriti,
Mudgala, Madhucchandas and Devala were sons of
Renu; and Agtaka, Kacchapa and H§rita were the
sons of Drsadvati. The same works enumerate the
Gotras, the families or tribes of the Kausika
Brahmanas these are Parthivas, Devaratas,
Yajfiavalkyas, Samarsanas, Udumbaras, Dumlanas,
Tarakayanas, Muncatas, Lohitas, Renus, Karisus,
Babhrus, Paninas, Dhydnajyapyas, Sydlantas,
Hiranyaksas, Sankus, Gdalavas, Yamaditas,
Devalas, Salankayanas, Baskalas, Dadativadaras,
Sausratas, Saindhavayanas, Nisnatas, Cunculas,
Salankkrityas, Sankrityas, Vadaranyas and an
infinity of others, multiplied by intermarriages with
other tribes and who, according to the Vayu, were
originally of the regal caste, like Visvamitra; but,
like him, obtained Brahmanhood through devotion.
