496

न ददौ मानुषीं मत्वा स्वयं पुष्पैरलङ्कृता।। २९॥
ततो ददर्शं कृष्णोऽपि सत्यभामासहायवान्।
देवोद्यानानि हृद्यानि नन्दनादीनि TATA ३०॥
ददर्शं च सुगन्धाढ्यं मञ्जरीपुञ्जधारिणम्।
नित्याहुलादकरं ताम्रबालप्ल्वशोभितम्।। ३ १॥
मथ्यमानेऽमृते जातं जातरूपोपमत्वचम्।
पारिजातं जगन्नाथं केशव: केशिसूदन:॥ ३ २॥
तं दृष्ट्वा we गोविन्दं सत्यभामा द्विजोत्तम।
कस्मानं द्वारकामेष नीयते देवपादप:।। ३ ३॥
यदि ते aga: सत्यं सत्यात्यर्थ प्रियेति मे।

मद्गेहनिष्कुचार्थाय तदयं नीयतां तरु: ॥ ३४॥

With the assent of Aditi. Indra then
respectfully saluted Jandrddana in all due
form, and conducted him and Satyabbama
through Nandana and other pleasant gardens
of the gods; where KeSava, the destroyer of
Kesi, saw the Parijata tree, the favourite of
Saci, which was produced when the ocean was
churned for ambrosia: the bark was of gold,
and it was embellished with young sprouting
Icavcs of a copper colour, and fruit-stalks
bearing numerous clusters of fragrant fruit.
When Satyabhama noticed this tree, she said
to her beloved lord, Govinda, ““Why should not
this divine tree be transported to Dvarika? If
what you say is true, and 1 am really dear to
you, then let this tree be taken away from
hence, and planted in the gardens of my
dwelling.

न मे जाम्बवती तादृगभीष्टा न च रुक्मिणी।

Tel यथा त्वमित्युक्तं त्वया कृष्णासकृत् प्रियम्॥३५॥
Wes तद् यद गोविन्द! Ararat तव।

तदस्तु पारिजातस्य मम गेहविभूषणम्।। ३६॥

बिभ्रती पारिजातस्य केशपक्षेण मञ्जरीम्।
सपत्नीनामहं मध्ये शोभेयमिति कामये।। ३७॥

You have often said to me, ‘Neither
Jambavati nor Rukmini is so dear to me,
Satya, as you are, If you have spoken the truth,
and not mere flattery, then let this Parijata tree
be the ornament of my mansion. I long to

THE VISNU-PURANAM

shine amidst my fellow queens, wearing the
flowers of this tree in the braids of my hair.”

WIN उवाच

इत्युक्त: सम्प्रहस्यैनं पारिजातं गरुत्मति।

आरोपयामास हरिस्तमूचुर्वनरक्षिण:॥ ३ ८॥

भो शची देवराजस्य महिषी तत् परिग्रहम्।

पारिजातं न गोविन्द! हत्तु मर्हसि पादपम्॥३९॥

शचीविभूषणार्थय देवैरमृतमन्थने।

उत्पादितोऽयं न क्षेमी गृहीत्वेनं गमिष्यसि ॥४०॥

देवराजो मुखप्रेक्षी यस्यास्तस्या: परिग्रहम्।

मौढ्यात् प्रार्थयसे क्षेमी गृहीत्वैनं fe को व्रजेत्॥४१॥।

Thus solicited by Satyabhima, Hari smiled
upon her, and taking the Parijata plant, put it
upon Garuda. The keepers of the garden
remonstrated, and said, “This Parijdta tree
belongs to Saci, the queen of the sovereign of
the gods: it is not proper, Govinda, for you to
remove it. At the time when the ocean was
churned for the beverage of immortality, this
tree was produced, for the purpose of
providing Saci with flowery ornaments. You
cannot be suffered to depart with it. It is
through ignorance that this is sought for by
any one, as it is the especial property of her on
whose countenance the king of the gods
delights to look; and who shall go away with
impunity, who attempts to carry it off ?

अवश्यमस्य देवेन्द्रो निष्कृतिं कृष्ण! यास्यति।
वज्रोद्यतकरं शक्रमनुयास्यन्ति चामरा:।।४२॥
तदलं सकलैर्देवैर्विग्रहेण तवाच्युत।

विपाककटु यत् कर्म्म तन्न शंसन्ति पण्डिता:॥४३॥

Assuredly the king of the gods will punish
this audacity; for his hand launches the
thunderbolt, and the immortals attend upon his
steps. Forbcar then, Krsna, nor provoke the
hostility of all the gods. The wise will not
commence actions that can be productive only
of unplesant consequences.”

इत्युक्ते तैरुवाचैतान् सत्यभामांतिकोपिनी।
का शची पारिजातस्य को वा शक्र: सुराधिप:।। ४४॥
