BOOK III, CHAP. 8

251

"Besides these their respective obligations,
there are duties equally incumbent upon all the
four castes. These are, the acquisition of
property, for the support of their families;
cohabitation with their wives, for the sake of
progeny; tenderness towards all creatures,
patience, humility, truth, purity, contentment,
decency of decoration, gentleness of speech,
friendliness; and freedom from envy and
repining, from avarice and from detraction.
These also are the duties of every condition of
life.

गुणोस्तथापद्धर्मांश्च विप्रादीनामिमाञ्छृणु॥ 3 ८॥
THT च वैश्योक्तं शूद्रकर्म न वै तयो:॥३९॥
सामर्थ्य सति तत्त्याज्यमुभाम्यामपि पार्थिव!
ततेवापदि कर्त्तव्यं न कुर्यात् कर्मसङ्करम्॥४०॥
इत्येते कथिता राजन् वर्णधर्मा मया तव।

धर्ममाश्रमिणां सम्यग् gaat मे निशामय॥४१॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे अष्टमोऽध्याय:।। ८॥

"In times of distress the peculiar functions
of the castes may be modified, as you shall
hear. A Brahmana may follow the occupations
of a Ksatriya or a Vaisya; the Ksatriya may
adopt those of the Vaisya and the Vaisya those
of the Ksatriya; but these two last should never
descend to the functions of the Sidra, if it be
possible to avoid them‘; and if that be not
possible, they must at least shun the functions
of the mined castes. I will now, Raja, relate to
you the duties of the several Aéramas or
conditions of life."

NOTES

1. Sagara, as we shall see, was a king of the solar
race. Aurva was a sage, the grandson of Bhrgu.
When the sons of king Krtavirya persecuted and
slew the children of Bhrgu, to recover the wealth
which their father and lavished upon them, they
destroyed even the children in the womb. One of
the women of the race of Bhrgu, in order to
preserve her embryo, secreted it in her thigh (Urv),
whence the child on his birth was named Aurva,
from his wrath proceeded a flame, that threatened
to destroy the world; but at the persuation of his

ancestors he cast it into the ocean, where it abode
with the face of a horse. Aurva was afterwards
religious preceptor to Sagara and bestowed upon
him the Agney4stram or fiery weapon, with which
he conquered the tribes of barbarians, who had
invaded his patrimonial possessions. Mahabh. Adi
Parvan, Dana Dharma Purana, Hari VarhSa.

2. Most of the Puranas, especially the Kirma,
Padma, Vamana, Agni and Garuda, contain
chapters or sections more or less in detail upon the
moral and ceremonial duties of the Hindus; and a
considerable portion of the Mahabharata, especially
in the Moksa Dharma Parvan, is devoted to the
same subject. No other Pauranik work, however,
contains a series of chapters exactly analogous to
those which follow and which contain a
compendious and systematic description of the
Acaras ot personal and social obligations of the
Hindus. The tenor of the whole is conformable to
the institutes of Manu and many passages are the
same.

3. The Pakayajfia or sacrifice in which food is
offcred, implies either the worship of the
Visvadevas, the rites of hospitality or occasional
oblations, on building a house, the birth of a child
or any occasion of rejoicing. It is to be understood,
however, that this injunction intends his performing
these ceremonies through the agency of a
Brahmana, as a Sidra cannot repeat the mantras or
prayers that accompany them; and it might be a
question how far he might be present for he ought
not even to hear such prayers repeated. The
performance of funeral rites involves some
personal share and the Sidra must present the
cakes, but it must be done without mantras; as the
Mitaksara; ‘This rite (the presentation of cakes)
must be performed by the Sidras, without formulae
on the twelfth day’. शूद्राणामप्येतत्कर्म्म कर्त्तव्यं द्वादशेद्रि। The
Vayu Purana, directs the performance of the five
great sacrifices by Sidras, only omitting the
mantras ; शूद्रेणापि प्रकर्त्तव्या पंचैते Arafat: 1 It may be
suspected that the Puranas relaxed in some degree
from the original rigour; for ‘it may be inferred that
the great ceremonies were altogether withheld from
Sadras in the time of Manu, who declares that none
have any right or part (Adhikara) in his code except
those who perform rites with mantras or the three
regenerate castes (II. 16); and denounces as heinous
sins teaching the Vedas to Siadras, performing
