३02

THE VISNU-PURANAM

over all beings, is now in a portion of himself

upon the earth.
कुशस्थली या तव भूप। रम्या
पुरी पुराभूदमरावतीव।
सा द्वारका सम्प्रति तत्र चास्ते
स केशवांशो बलदेवनामा।। ३४॥
तस्मै त्वमेनां तनयां नरेन्द्र!
प्रयच्छ मायामनुजाय जायाम्।
श्लाघ्यो वरोऽसौ तनया तवेयं
स्त्रीरलभूता सदृशो हि योग:।॥ ३५॥

That city Kusasthali which was formerly
your capital and rivalled the city of the
immortals, is now known as Dvaraka®” and
there reigns a portion of that divine being in
the person of Baladeva; to him, who appears
as a man, present her as a wife; he is a worthy
bridegroom for this excellent damsel and she
is a Suitable bride for him.

पराशरं उवाच
इतीरितोऽसौ कमलोद्भवेन
ya समासाद्य पति: प्रजानाम्।
ददर्श ह्रस्वान् पुरुषानशेषा-
नत्यौजस: स्वल्पविवेकवीर्य्यन्॥ 3 ६॥

Being thus instructed by the lotus-born
divinity, Raivata returned with his daughter to
earth, where he found the race of men
dwindled in stature, reduced in vigour and
enfeebled in intellect.

कुशस्थलीं ताञ्च पुरीमुपेत्य
दृष्टान्यरूपां प्रददौ स्वकन्याम्।
सीरध्वजाय स्फटिकाचलाभ-
वक्ष:स्थलायातुलधीर्नरेन्द्र:।। ३७॥
उच्चप्रमाणामति तामवेक्ष्य
स्वलाङ्गलाग्रेण स तालकेतु:।
विनामयामास ततश्च सापि
aya सद्यो वनिता यथान्या।। ३ ८॥
सीरायुधोऽसो विधिनोपयेमे।

दत्त्वा च कन्यां स नृपोजगाम
हिमाचलं वै तपसे धृतात्मा॥ ३ ९॥
neta विष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे प्रथम: अध्याय:॥।

Repairing to the city of Kusathali, which he
found much altered, the wise monarch
bestowed his unequalled daughter on the
wielder of the ploughshare, whose breast was
as fair and radiant as crystal. Beholding the
damsel of excessively lofty height, the chief,
whose banner is a palm-tree, shortened her
with the end of his ploughshare and she
became his wife. Balarama having espoused,
agreeably to the ritual, Revati, the daughter of
Raivata, the king retired to the mountain
Himalaya and ended his days in devout

AG 3
austerities. 3
eK

NOTES

1. The complete series of the different dynasties
is found elsewhcre only in the Vayu, the
Brahmanda (which is the same), the Matsya and the
Bhagavata Puranas. The Brahma Purana and the
Hari Varhga, the Agni, Linga, Kiirma and Garuda
Puranas have lists of various extent, but none
beyond the families of Paéndu and Krsna. The
Markandeya contains an account of a few of the
kings of the solar dynasty alone; and the Padma, of
a part of the solar and lunar princes only, besides
accounts of individuals. In the Ramayana,
Mahabharata and in the other Puranas, occasional
short genealogies and notices of individual princes
occur. In general there is a tolerable conformity,
but this is not invariably the case, as we shall have
occasion to observe.

2. In the historical passages of all the Puranas in
which such occur and especially in the Visnu and
Vayu, verses, apparently the fragments of a more
ancient narrative, are frequently cited. It may also
be noticed, as a peculiarity of this part of the
Puranas, that the narration is in prose.

3. Daksa is elsewhere said to ‘have been one of
the mind-borm sons of Brahma or tc have been the
son of the Pracetasas : See Bk. I. Ch. XV. n. 5.

4. According to the nomenclature sometimes
followed and as we shall have reason to conclude
intended in this place, there are ten sons of Manu.
