BOOK I, CHAP. 2

13

means very consistently, 'embodied spirit detached
from the indiscrete cause of the world is known as
Brahma., The Padma Purana inserts the first Here
line, etc., but has महदाविशे wed सूजतीति विनिश्चय:।
"Which creates undoubtedly Mahat and the other
qualities:, assigning the first epithets, therefore, as
the Visnu does to Prakrti only. The Linga also
refers the expression to Prakrti alone, but makes it a
secondary cause: अव्यक्तं Yard तस्मादभवत् कारणं प्रधानं
प्रकृतिं wa यदाहुस्तत्त्वचिन्तका:। ‘An indiscrete cause,
which those acquainted with first principles call
Pradhana and Prakrti proceeded from that Isvara
(Siva), This passage is one of very many instances
in which expressions are common to several
Purinas that seem to be borrowed from one
another, or from some common source older than
any of them, especially in this instance, as the same
text occurs in Manu.

15, The expression of the text is rather obscure;
"All was pervaded (or comprehended) by that chief
principle before (recreation), after the (last)
destruction’  तेनाग्रे सर्वमेवासीद् व्याप्तं वै प्रलयादनु। The
ellipses are filled up by the commentator. This, he
adds, is to be regarded as the state of things at a
Maha Pralaya, or total dissolution, leaving,
therefore, crude matter, nature, or chaos, as a
coexistent clement with the Supreme. This, which
is conformable to the philosophical doctrine, is not
however that of the Puranas in general, nor that of
our text, which states (b. V1. c. 4), that at a Prakrta,
or elementary dissolution. Pradhana itself merges
into the deity. Neither is it apparently the doctrine
of the Vedas, although their language is somewhat
equivocal.

16. The metre here is one common to the Vedas,
Tristubh, but in other respects the language is not
characteristic of those compositions. The purport of
the passage is rendered somewhat doubtful by its
close, and by the explanation of. commentator. The
former is, Uh प्रधानिकं ब्रह्म पुमांस्तदासीत्। ‘One
Pradhanika Brahma Spirit: that, was. The
commentator explains Pradhdnika. Pradhana eva.
the same word as Pradhana; but it is a derivative
word, which may be used attributively. implying
“having, or conjoined with. Pradhina., The
commentator. however, interprets it as the
substantive; for he adds, There was Pradhdna and
Brahma and Spirit; this traid was at the period of

dissolution;' warts ब्रह्म च पुमांश्चेति sata प्रलये आसीत्।
He evidently, however, understands their conjoint
existence as one only; for he continues, ‘So,
according to the Vedas, then there was neither the
non-existent (invisible cause, or matter) nor the
existent (visible effect, or creation): च
श्रुतिर्नसदासीत्रोसदासत्तदानीं। meaning that there was only
One Bcing, in whom matter and its modifications
were all comprehended.

17. Or it might be rendered. ‘Those two other
forms (which proceed) from his supreme nature;
विष्णो: स्वरूपात्परत: that is, from the nature of Visnu,
when he is Nirupadhi, or without adventitious
attributes: निरुपाधेर्विष्णो: स्वरूपात्। ‘other’ (34); the
commentator states they are other or separate from
Visnu only through Maya, illusion,’ but here
implying ‘falsc notion; the elements of creation
being in essence one with Visnu, though in
existence detachcd and different.

18. Pradhana, when unmodificd, is, according to
the Sankhyas and Pauraniks, nothing more than the
three qualities in equilibrio, or 15 goodness,
foulness, and darkness neutralising each other;
(Sarhkhya Karika, p. 52.) so in the Matsya Purana:
परिकीर्तिता। This state is synonymous with the non-
evolution of material products, or with dissolution;
implying however, scparate existence, and detached
from spirit. This being the case, it is asked what
should sustain matter and spirit whilst separate, or
renew their combination so as to renovate creation
? It is aswered, Time, which is when everything
else is not; and which, at the end of a certain
interval, unites Matter, Pradhaéna, and Purusa. and
produces creation. Conceptions of this kind are
evidently comprised in the Orphic triad, or the
ancient notion of the co-operation of three such
principles in creation, as Phanes or Eros, which is
the Hindu spirit or Purusa; Chaos, matter or
Piadhana : and Chronos. or Kala time.

19. Pradhana is styled Vyaya ‘that which may be
expended;' or Parindmin ‘which may be modified:,
and Purusa is called Avyaya 'inconsumable;’ or
aparinamin. ‘immutable.’ The expressions प्रविश्य
having entered into,’ and क्षोभयामास ‘agitated,’ recall
the mode in which divine intelligence, mens, vove,
was conceived by the ancients to operate upon
matter:
