THE VISNU-PURANAM

BOOK IV
CHAPTER I ब्रह्मणश्च aa: प्रजापति:,
प्रथमोऽध्याय: दक्षस्याप्यदिति:, , विवस्वतो मनु:,

(वंशविस्तारकथनम्। ब्रह्मणो दक्षादीनाञ्चोत्पत्ति:। करूष-पृषघ्राख्या: :॥५॥

पुरुरवसो जन्म, रेवत्या सह बलरामस्य विवाहश्च) स्फीश्चक्खिभ्रूपुत्रकाग्मश्चक्या॥दा।
मैत्रेय उवाच तत्रापहते होतुरपचारादिला नाम HAT बभूव।।७॥
wre! यन्नरै: art साधुकर्मण्यवस्थितै:। सैव च मित्रावरुणप्रसादात् सुद्युम्नो नाम मनो: पुत्रो
तन्मह्य गुरुणाख्यातं नित्यनैमित्तिकात्मकम्।। १॥ मैत्रेयासीत्। yeaa स्त्री सती सोमसूनो-
वर्णधर्मास्तथाख्याता eat ये चाश्रमेषु वै। बुधस्याश्रमसमीपे बभ्राम। ८॥

श्रोतुमिच्छाम्यहं वंशान् area प्रब्रूहि मे गुरो।। २॥ सानुरागश्च eT बुध: पुरूरवसमात्मज-

Maitreya said-Venerable preceptor, you मुत्पादयामास॥९॥
have explained to me the perpetual and जाते च तस्मिन्नमिततेजोभि: परमर्षिभिरिष्टिमय ऋङ्गयो

occasional ceremonies which are to be यजुर्म्मय: साममयोऽथर्व्वमय: सर्वमयो मनो मयो
performed by those righteous individuals who ज्ञानमयोऽकिञ्चिन्मयो war यज्ञपुरुषस्वरूपी सुद्युम्नस्य
are diligent in their devotions; and you have eaafireraPrderaten: ।। १०॥

also described to me the duties which devolve *

upon the several castes and on the different  Wararerfaen पुनरपि सुद्युम्नोऽभवत्॥ ११॥

orders of the human race. I have now to त्तस्याप्युकल-गयत्-विनतसंज्ञास्त्रय: पुत्रा बभूवु:।

request you will relate to me the dynasties of —y icten therefore, Maitreya, to the entire

: 1
the kings who have ruled over the earth. series of the princes of this family, by which
पराशर उवाच all sin shall be effaced. Before the evolution of
॥ र्व ex the mundane egg, existed Brahma, who was

were at sed Hiranyagarbha, the form of that supreme
तस्य वंशसमुच्छेदो न कदाचिद्भविष्यति।। 3 Brahma which consist of Visnu as identical

Paragara replied-I will repeat to you, with the Rk, Yajur and Sama Vedas; the
Maitreya, an account of the family of Manu, primeval, uncreated cause of all worlds. From
commencing with Brahma and graced by a the right thumb of Brahma was born the
number of religious, magnanimous and heroic patriarch Daksa;° his daughter was Aditi, who
princes. Of which it is said, "The lineage of was the mother of the sun. The Manu
him shall never be extinct, who daily calls to Vaivasvata was the son of the celestial
mind the race of Manu, originating with luminary; and his sons were Iksvaku, Nrga,
Brahma."” Dhrsta, Ga Narisyanta, Pransu, Nabhaga,

irth, irous of sons, re
यथा सकलजगतामनादिरादिभूत ऋग्यजु:-सामादिमयो । व ।

a sacrifice for that purpose to Mitra and
भगवद्विष्णुमयं ब्रह्मणो मूर्तिरूपं हिरण्यगर्भो ब्रह्माण्डतो Varuna; but the rite being deranged, through
भगवान् ब्रह्मा WAT Sl an irregularity of the ministering priest, a
