2३8

THE VISNU-PURANAM

pupil of Satyasri, the author of the Samhitas and a
Nirukta or glossary; whence Colebrooke supposes
him the same with Yaska. As. Res. VII, 375. It is
highly probably that the text of the Vayu may be
made to correct that of the Visnu in this place,
which is inaccurate, notwithstanding the copies
agree : they read, संहितात्रितयं we शाकपूर्णिरथेतरं

रोत्तद्वच्चतुर्थं मुनिसत्तम। Here Sakapirnir-atha-
itaram is the necessary construction; but query if it
should not be Sakapirni Rathantara. The parallel
passage in the Vayu is, War संहितास्तिस्र:
शाकपूर्णिरथान्तर:। fed च पुनश्चक्रे चतुर्थं द्विजसत्तमा:। Now in
describing the pupils of Satyasri, Rathaintara was
named clearly enough Weert: प्रथमस्तेषां
तस्मादन्योरथान्तर:। बाष्कलिश्च भरद्वाज इति शाखाप्रवर्त्तक। In
another passage it would seem to be implied that
this Baskali was the author of the Sarmbhitas and
Rathatara of the Nirukta only : (Svayarnbhuva
बाष्कलिश्च भरद्वाजस्तिस्र: Ward संहिता:। रथान्तरो निरुक्तं च पुनश्चक्रे
चतुर्थकं । However this may be, his being the author
of the Nirukta identified him with Sakaptrni and
makes it likely that the two names should come in
juxtaposition in our text, as well as in the Vayu. It
must be admitted, however, that there are some
rather inexplicable repetitions in the part of the
Vayu where this account occurs, although two
copies agree in the reading. That a portion of the
Vedas goes by the name of Rathantara we have
seen (Bk. I. Ch. V); but as far as is yet known, the
name is confined to different prayers or hymns of
the Uhya Gana of the SAmaveda. The text of the
Visnu also admits of a different explanation
regarding the work of Sakapirni and instead of a
threcfold division of the original, the passage may
mean that he composed a third Sarhité. So
Colcbrooke says "the Visnu Purana omits the
Sakhas of Asvalayana and Sankhydyana and
intimates that Sakapimi gave the third varied
edition from that of Indrapramati." The Vayu,
however, is clear in ascribing three Sarhités or
Sakhas to Sakaparni.

10. In the Vayu the four pupils of Sakaptirni are
called Kenava Dalaki, Satavalaka and Naigama.

11. This Baskali may either be, according to the
commentator, the pupil of Paila, who, in addition to
the four Sarhhités previously noticed, compiled
three others; or he may be another Baskali, a
fellow-pupil of Sakaptrni. The Vayu makes him a

disciple of Satyasri the fellow-pupil of Sakalya and
Rathantara and adds the name or title Bharadvaja.

12. In the Vayu they are called Nandayantya,
Pannagari and Arjjava.

13. Both the Visnu and Vayu Puranas omit two
other principal divisions of the Rk, those of
A§valayana and Sankhyayana or the Kausitaki. As
Res. VII. 375. There is no specification of the
aggregate number of Samhitas of the Rk in our text
or in the Vayu; but they describe eighteen,
including the Nirukta; or as Colebrooke sates,
sixteen (As. Res. VIII. 374); that is, omitting the
two portions of the original as divided by Paila.
The Kiirma Purana states the number at twenty-
one; but treatises on the study of the Vedas reduce
the Sakhas of the Rk to five.

we
