32

And the creator displayed infinite variety in
the objects of sense, in the properties of living
things, and in the forms of bodies: he
determined in the beginning, by the authority
of the Vedas, the names and forms and
functions of all ereatures, and of the gods; and
the names and appropriate offices of the Rsis,
as they also are read in Vedas. In like manner
as the produces of the seasons designate in
periodical revolution the return of the same
season, so do the same circumstances indieate
the reeurrence of the same Yuga, or age; and
thus, in the beginning of cach Kalpa, does
Brahma repeatedly create the world,
possessing the power that is derived from the
will to create, and assisted by the natural and
essential faculty of the object to be created.

KEK

NOTES

1. The terms here employcd are for qualities.
Gunas; which, as we have alrcady noticed, are
those of goodness, foulness, and darkness. The
characteristics, or Swabhdvas, are the inherent
properties of the qualities, by which they act, as,
soothing, terrific, or stupefying: and the forms.
Swuriipas. are the distinctions of biped, quadruped,
brute, bird, fish, and the like.

2. Or Tamas. Moha,
Andhatamisra; they are
obstruction, viparyyaya, of soul's liberation,
according to the Sarhkhya : they are explained to
be, 1. The belief of material substance being the
same with spirit; 2. Notion of property or
possession, and consequent attachment to objects,
as children and the like, as being one’s own; 3.
Addiction to the enjoyments of sense; 4. Impatience
or wrath; and 5. Fear of privation or death. They
are called in the Patafijala philosophy, the five
afflixations, Klega, but are similarly explained by
Avidya, ‘ignorance;' Asmita, 'selfishness,, literally

Mahamoha, Tamisra.
the five kinds of

‘l-am-ness : 'Raga, ‘love;’ Dwesha, hatred :’ and
Abhinivesa, (अभिनिवेश:), ‘dread of temporal
suffering.’ Samkhya Kariké, p. 148—150. This

creation by Brahma in the Varaha Kalpa begins in
the same way, and in the same words, in most of
the Puranas. The Bhagavata reverses the order of

THE VISNU-PURANAM

these five products, and gives them, Andhatamisra,
Tamisra, Mahamoha, Moha, and Tamas; a variation
obviously more immethodical than the usual
reading of the text, and adopted, no doubt, merely
for the sake of giving the passage an air of
originality.

3. This is not to be confounded with elementary
creation, although the description would very well
apply to that of crude nature, or Pradhana : but, as
will be seen presently, we have here to do with
final productions, or the forms in which the
previously created elements and faculties are more
or less perfectly aggregated. The first class of these
forms is here said to be immovable things; that is,
the mineral and vegetable kingdoms; for the solid
earth, with its mountains and rivers and seas, was
already prepared for their reception. The ‘fivefold’
immovable creation is indeed, according to the
comment, restricted to vegetables, five orders of
which are enumerated, or, 1. trees ; 2. shrubs; 3.
climbing plants; 4, creepers : and 5. grasses.

4, Tiryak. ‘crooked;' and Srotas, 'a canal.'

5. Twenty-eight kinds of Badhas (ate), which
in the Sashkhya system mean disabilities, as defects
of the senses, blindness, deafness, etc.; and defects
of intellect, discontent, ignorance, and the like. S.
Karika, p. 148, 151. In place of Badha, however,
the more usual reading, as in the Bhagavata,
Varaha. and Markandeya Puranas, is Vidha (fae),
‘kind,’ sort., as अष्टाविंशद्विधात्मका:। implying twenty-
eight sorts of animals. These are thus specified in
the Bhagavata. III. 10 : Six kinds have single hoofs,
nine have double or cloven hoofs, and thirteen have
five claws or nails instead of hoofs. The first are the
horse, the mule, the ass, the yak, the sarabha, and
the gaura, or white deer. The second are the cow,
the goat, the buffalo, the hog, the gayal, the black
deer, the antelope, the camel, and the sheep. The
last are the dog, shacal, wolf, tiger, cat, hare,
porcupine, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, lizard,
and alligator.

6. Urddha. ‘above,' and Srotas as before; their
nourishment being derived from the exterior, not
from the interior of the body : according to the
commentator: उर्द्वमुपरि देहाद्वहिरेव Gla आहारस्य ग्रहणं यस्य
स:। as a text of the Vedas has it; ‘Through satiety
derived from even beholding ambrosia; `
et

7. Arvak. ‘downwards,’ and Srotas. ‘canal’
