554

reasons I have not asked for your kingdom,
nor made a demand which ignorance alone
would have suggested. Those only who are
destitute of knowledge, whose minds are
engrossed by selfishness, who are intoxicated
with the inebriating beverage of  self-
sufficiency, desire kingdoms; not such as I am.
RR उवाच

Wee: साध्विति we तत: केशिध्वजो नृप:।

खाण्डिक्यजनकं प्रीत्या seat वचनं wo

When king Kegidhvaja heard these words,

he was much pleased, and exclaimed, “It is
well spoken!”

अहन्त्वविद्यामृत्युञ्च aya: करोमि वै।

राज्यं यागांश्च विविधान् भोगै: पुण्यक्षयं aan ९॥

Then addressing Khandikya affectionately,
he said, “Listen to my words. Through desire
of escaping death by the ignorance of works I
exercise the regal power, celebrate various
sacrifices, and enjoy pleasures subversive of
purity.

त्तदिदं ते मनो दिष्ट्या विवेकैश्वर्यतां गतम्।

श्रूयतां चाप्यविद्याया: स्वरूपं PATA on

अनात्मन्यात्मबुद्धिर्या अस्वे स्वमिति या मति:।

अविद्यातरुसम्भूतेर्बीजमेतद् fear स्थितम्॥ ११॥

Fortunate is it for you that your mind has
attached itself to the dominion of
discrimination. Pride’ of your race! now listen
to the real nature of ignorance, The
(erroneous) notion that self consists in what is
not self, and the opinion that property consists
in what is not one’s own, constitute the double
seed of the tree of ignorance.

पञ्चभूतात्मके देहे देही मोहतमोवृत:।
अहमेतदितीत्युच्चै: कुरुते कुमतिर्मततिम्। १२॥
आत्मन्यात्ममयं भावं क: करोति कलेवरे॥ १३॥

The _ill-judging embodied being,
bewildered by the darkness of fascination,
situated in a body composed of the five
elements, loudly asserts, ‘This is I’: but who
would ascribe spiritual individuality to a body

THE VISNU-PURANAM

in which soul is distinct from the ether, air,
fire, water, and earth (of which that body is
composed?!

कलेवरोपभोग्यं fe गृहक्षेत्रादिकञ्च क:।

अदेहे ह्यात्मनि प्राज्ञो ममेदमिति मन्यते।। १४॥
इत्यञ्च पुत्र-पौत्रेषु तद्देहोत्पादितेषु क:।

करोति पण्डित: स्वाम्यमनात्मनि कलेवरे॥ १५॥

What man of understanding assigns to
disembodied spirit corporeal fruition, or lands,
houses, and the like, that it should say, ‘These
are mine?’ What wise man entertains the idea
of property in sons or grandsons begotten of
the body after the spirit has abandoned it?

ad देहोपभोगाय Hed कर्म्म मानव:।
देहश्चान्यो VET पुंसस्तदा बन्धाय तत्परम्।। १६॥

Man performs all acts for purpose of bodily
fruition, and the consequence of such acts is
another body; so that their result is nothing but
confinement to bodily existence.

मृन्मयञ्च यथा गेहं लिप्यते च मृदन्भसा।
पार्थिवोऽयं तथा देहो मृदन्नालेपनस्थिति:।। १७॥

In the same manner as a mansion of clay is
plastered with clay and water, so the body,
which is of earth, is perpetuated by earth and
water (or by eating and drinking).

पञ्चभूतात्मकैर्भोगै: पञ्चभूतात्मकं वपु:।
आप्यायते यदि तत: पुंसो गर्वोऽत्र किं wan en
मोहश्रमं प्रयातोऽसौ वासनारेणुगुण्ठित:।। १९॥

The body, consisting of the five elements,
is nourished by substance equally composed of
those elements; but since this is the case, what
is there in this life that man should be proud
of? Travelling the path of the world for many
thousands of births, man attains only the
weariness of bewilderment, and is smothered
by the dust of imagination.

प्रक्षाल्यते यदा सोऽस्य रेणुर्जानोष्णवारिणा।
तदा संसारपान्थस्य याति मोहश्रम: शमम्॥ Von
Weak शमं याते स्वस्थान्त: करण: पुमान्।
