३54

. THE VISNU-PURANAM

At the expiration of his long reign
K4rttavirya was killed by Parasurama, who
was an embodied portion of the mighty
Narayana.’’ Of the hundred sons of this king,
the HN principal were Stra’, Strasena, Vrs
ana’, Madhu™ and Jayadhvaja.'° The son of
the last was Talajangha, who had a hundred
sons, called after him Talajatighas : the eldest
of these was Vitihotra; another was Bharata!®,
who had two sons, Vrsa and Sujati!” . The son
of Vrsa was Madhu'®: he had a hundred sons,
the chief of whom was Vrsni and from him the
family obtained the name of Vrsni’’. From the
name of their father, Madhu, they were also
called Madhavas; while from the
denomination of their common ancestor Yadu,
the whole were termed Yadavas.””

६३३३

NOTES

1. Or, 'in which Krsna was born.’ It might have
bcen expected, from the importance of this
genealogy, that it would have been so carefully
preserved, that the authorities would have closely
concurred in its details. Although, however, the
leading specifications coincide, yet, as we shall
have occasion to notice, great and irreconcilable
variations occur.

2. The two first generally agree. There are
differences in the rest; as

Vayu Brahma _ Bhagavata Kiirma
Nila Nala Nala Nila
Ajita  Anjika Aripu Jina
Raghu Payoda Raghu

The Brahma and Hari Varnga read Sahasrada for
the first name; and the Linga has Balasani in place
of Nala. The Agni makes Satajit also a son of Yadu.

3. Venuhaya : Bhdgavata. Uttanahaya : Padma.
Vettahaya : Matsya. They were the sons of
Sahasrada : Brahma and Hari Varna.

4, Dharmatantra ; Vayu, Dharma : Karma.

5. Kirtti : Vayu.

6. Sanjneya : Vayu. Sankana : Agni. Sahajija of
Sahanjani pura : Brahma. Sanjnita : Linga. Sanhana
: Matsya. Sohajfiji : Bhagavata.

7. By whom the city of Mahismati on the
Narbadda was founded : Brahma and Hari Varhsa.

8. So the Bhagavata; but the Vayu, more
correctly, has Bhadrasrenya. See Bk. IV. Ch. VIII.
n. 12.

9. Kanaka
Ktrma.

10. According to the Vayu, Karttavirya was the
aggressor, invading Lanka and there taking Ravana
prisoner. The circumstances are more usually
narrated as in our text.

1]. See Bk. IV. Ch. VIL. Karttavirya’s fate was
the consequence of an imprecation denounced by
Apava or’ Vasistha, the son of Varuna, whose
hermitage had been burnt, according to the
Mahabharata, Rajadharma, by Citrabhanu or Fire,
to whom the king had in his bounty presented the
world. The Vayu makes the king himself the
incendiary, with arrows given him by Surya to dry
up the ocean.

12. Urijita : Bhagavata.

13. Vrsabha : Bhagavata. Dhrsta : Matsya, Dhrs
na : Karma. Prsokta : Padma, Vrsni : Linga. Krs
naksa : Brahma.

14. Krsna, in all except the Bhagavata.

15. King of Avanti ; Brahma and Hari VarhSa.

16. Ananta : Vayu and Agni; elsewhere omitted.

17. Durjaya only : Vayu, Matsya.

18. This Madhu, according to the Bhagavata,
was the son of Karttavirya. The Brahma and Hari
Varnga make him the son of Vrsa, but do not say
whose son Vrsa was. The commentator on the latter
asserts that the name is a synonym of Payoda, the
son of Yadu, according to his authority and to that
alone.

19. The Bhagavata agrees with our text, but the
Brahma, Hari Varhsa, Linga and Karma make Vrs
ana the son of Madhu and derive the family name
of Vrsnis or Varsneyas from him.

20, The text takes no notice of some collateral
tribes, which appear to merit remark. Most of the
other authorities, in mentioning the sons of
Jayadhvaja, observe that from them came the five
great divisions of the Haihaya tribe. These,
according to the Vayu, were the Talajanghas,
Vitihotras, Avantyas, Tundikeras and Jatas. The
Matsya and Agni omit the first and substitute
Bhojas; and the latter are included in the list in the
Brahma, Padma, Linga and Hari Varhsa. For Jatas
the reading is Safijatas or Sujatas. The Brahma
Purdna has also Bharatas, who, as well as the

: Vayu. Varaka : Linga., Andhaka ;
