BOOK V, CHAP. 29

49]

She seems, however, to be an addition to the more favourable picture of courtly manners; but scenes
usually specified eight, of whose several marriages of violence have never been infrequent at the courts

the Bhagavata gives the best account. In addition to of Rajput princes.

the three first respecting whom particulars are
found in all, Kdalindi, or the Yamuna, is the
daughter of the sun, whom Krsna meets on one of
his visits to Indraprastha, and who claims him as
the reward of her penance. His next wife.
Mitravinda, is the daughter of his maternal aunt
Rajadhidevi (Bk. IV. Ch. XIV.). and sister of Vinda
and Anuvinda, kings of Avanti: she chooses him at
her Svayamvara. The Hari Varhsa calls her
Saudattd, daughter of Sivi; and she is subsequently
termed Saivya by our text. Nagnajiti or Satya, the
next wife, was the daughter of Nagnajit, king of
KauSala, and was the prize of Krsna's overcoming
seven fierce bulls, whom no other hero had
encountered with success, Bhadra, princess of
Kekaya, alsto Krsna's cousin, the daughter of
Srutakirtti (Bk. IV. Ch. XV.), was his next: and his
eighth wife was Madri, the daughter of the king of
Madra; named, according to the Bhagavata, Laks
ana; and to the Hari V., Saubhima; distinguishing,
as does our text, clearly Laksmana from Madri. and
like it having no satisfactory equivalent for Bhadra.
The Hari Vamsa does not name Rohini, but
specifies other names, as Vrhati etc. In the life of
Krsna, taken from the Bhagavata through a Persian
translation, published by Maurice, there is a curious
instance of the barbarous distortion of Sanskrit
names by the joint labours of the English and
Persian translators: the wives of Krsna are written.
Rokemenee (Rukmini), Seteebhavani
(Satyabhama), Jamoometee (Jambavati),
Kalenderee (K4lindi), Lechmeena (Laksmana),
Soeta (Saty4?), Bhedravatee (Bhadra). Mihrbeoda
(Mitravinda).

2 These, according to the Mahabharata. Adi P,,
were Apsarasas, or nymphs. In the Dana Dharma
they become Krsna's wives through a boon given
him by Uma.

3 The Niska is a weight of gold, but according to
different authorities of very different amount. The
commentator here terms it a weight of four
Suvarnas, each about 175 grains troy.

4 The Bhagavata and Hari Vamsga, which both
tell this story, agree in the death of Rukmin; but in
the Mahabharata he appears in the war, on the side
of the Pandavas. The occurrence is a not very

eK
