2३4

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अगाधापारमक्षय्यं जगत् सम्मोहनालयम्।
सम्प्रकाशप्रव्रत्तिभ्यां पुरुषार्थप्रयोजनम्।। २४॥
सांख्यज्ञानवतां निष्ठा गति: शमदमात्मनाम्।
यत्तदव्यक्तममृतं TAA Tel PTA २५॥
प्रधानमात्मयोनिंश्च गुहासत्त्वञ्च शस्यते।

अविभागं तथा Yost बहुधात्मकम्।॥ २६॥

The syllable Orh is defined to be the eternal
monosyllabic Brahma.’ The word Brahma is
derived from the root Vrha (to increasc),
because it is infinite (spirit) and because it is
the cause by which the Vedas (and all things)
are developed. Glory to Brahma, who is
addressed by that mystic word, associated
eternally with the triple universe” and who is
one with the four Vedas. Glory to Brahma,
who, alike in the destruction and renovation of
the world, is called the great and mysterious
cause of the intellectual principle (Mahat);
who is without limit in time or space and
exempt from diminution or decay; in whom
(as connected with the property of darkness)
originates worldly illusion; and in whom
resides the end of soul (fruiting or liberation),
through the properties of light and of activity
(or goodness and foulness). He is the refuge of
those who are versed in the Sarmkhya
philosophy; of those who have acquired
control over their thoughts and passions. He is
the invisible, imperishable Brahma; varying in
form invariable in substance; the chief
principle, self-engendered; who is said to
illuminate the caverns of the heart; who is
indivisible, radiant, undecaying, multiform. To
that supreme Brahma be forever adoration.

परमब्रह्मणे तस्मै नित्यमेव नमो नम:।
यद्रूपं वासुदेवस्य परमात्मस्वरूपिण:॥ २७॥
Wag ब्रह्म त्रिधाभेदमभेदमपि स प्रभु:।
सर्वभूतेष्वभेदोऽसौ भिद्यते भिन्नबुद्धिभि:।। २८॥
स ऋङ्मय: साममय: स चात्मा स यजुर्मय:।
ऋग्यजु:सामसारात्मा स एवात्मा शरीरिणाम्।। २९॥
स भिद्यते वेदमय: स वेदं

करोति भेदैर्बहुभि: सशाखम्।

शाखाप्रणेता स समस्तशाखा
ज्ञानस्वरूपो भ्गवाननन्त:।। ३ ०॥
sha श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांशे तृतीयोऽध्याय:॥६॥

That form of Vasudeva, who is the same
with supreme spirit, which is Brahma and
which, although diversified as threefold, is
identical, is the lord, who is conceived by
those that contemplate variety in creation to be
distinct in all creatures. He, composed of the
Rk, Sama and Yajur Vedas, is at the same time
their essence, as he is the soul of al embodied
spirits. He, distinguished as consisting of the
Vedas, creates the Vedas and divides them by
many subdivisions into branches : he is the
author of those branches he is those
aggregated branches; for he, the eternal lord, is
the essence of true knowledge’®.

KEK
NOTES

1. The text has, ‘Hear from me an account of
Vyasas of the different Manvantaras' (यस्मिन् मन्वन्तरे
ये % व्यासा:); but this is inconsistent with what
follows, in which the enumeration is confined to
the Vaivasvata Manvantara.

2. This name occurs as that of the one of the
kings of the solar dynasty and is included by
Colebrooke amongst the persons of royal descent,
who are mentioned as authors of hymns in the
Regveda. As. Res. VIET. 383.

3. A similar list of Vyasas is given in the Kirma
and Vayu Puranas. Many of the individuals appear
as authors of different hymns and prayers in the
Vedas; and it is very possible that the great portion,
if not all of them, had a real existence, being the
framers or teachers of the religion of the Hindus
before a complete ritual was compiled.

4. We have already had occasion to explain the
sanctity of this mono-syllable (see Bk. I. Ch. In. 1),
which ordinarily commences different portions of
the Vedas and which, as the text describes it, is
identified with the supreme, undefinable deity or
Brahma. So in the Bhagavadgita ; ओमित्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म
व्याहरन् मामनुस्मरन्। ‘Repeating Orh, the monosyllable,
which is Brahma and calling me to mind :' which is
not exactly the same idea that is conveyed by
Schlegel's version; 'Mono-syllabum mysticum Ori
