348

THE VISNU-PURANAM

गर्गभूमिस्तु वत्सोवत्सस्य धीमत: ब्राह्मणा: क्षत्रियाश्चैव तयो: पुत्रा
मुधाम्मिका:। 'The son of Venuhotra was the celebrated
Gargya; Gargabhimi was the son of Gargya; and
Vatsa, of the wise Vatsa; virtuous Brahmanas and
Ksatriyas were the sons of these two.’ By the
second Vatsa is perhaps meant Vatsabhimi; and the
purpose of the passage is, that Gargya (or possibly
rather Bharga, one of the sons of Pratarddana) and
Vatsa were the founders of two races (Bhimi,
‘earth,’ implying ‘source’ or 'founder'), who were Ks
atriyas by birth and Brahmanas by profession. The
Brahma and Hari Variisa apparently
misunderstanding this text, have increased the
perplexity. According to them, the son of
Venuhotra was Bharga; Vatsabhiimi was the son of
Vatsa; and Bhargabhimi (Bhrgubhimi, Brahma)
was from Bhargava. 'These sons of Angiras were
born in the family of Bhrgu, thousands of great
might, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaigyas.' वेणुहोत्रसु
तश्चापि भर्गो नाम waa: | वत्सस्य वत्सभूमिस्तु भर्गभूमिस्तुभार्गवात्
( भृगुभूमिस्तुभार्गवात्)। एतेह्यङ्गिरस: ya: जाता वेंऽथभार्गवे।
ब्राह्मणा: क्षत्रियावैश्या स्तेजोयुक्ता सहस्रश:॥ The commentator
has, नत्सस्यालर्कयितु पुत्रान्तरमाह वत्सभूमिरिति। भार्गवात्
वत्सभ्रातु:। अङ्गिरसो गालवस्याङ्गिरसत्वात् भार्गवे विश्वामित्रस्य
भार्गवत्वात्॥ ‘Another son of Vatsa, the father of
Alarka, is described, Vatsabhimi. From Bhargava,
the brother of Vatsa. (They were) Angirasas from
Galava belonging to that family (and were born) in
the family of Bhrgu from the descent of
Visvamitra.' The interpretation is not very clear, but
it authorises the notion above expressed, that Vatsa
and Bharga, the sons of Pratarddana, are the
founders of two races of Ksatriya-Brahmanas.

17. On the subject of note 12 some further
illustration is derivable from the Mahabharata,
Santi Parva, Dana-dharma. Haryasva, the king of
the Kasis, reigning between the Ganges and the
Yamuna or in the Doab, was invaded and slain by
the Haihayas, a race descended, according to this
authority; from Saryati, the son of Manu (see Bk.
IV. Ch, III). Sudeva, the son of Haryasva, was also
attacked and defeated by the same enemies.
Divodasa, his son, built and fortified Bandrasa as a
defence against the Haihayas, but in vain, for they
took it and compelled him to fly. He sought refuge
with Bharadvaja, by whose favour he had a son
born to him, Pratarddana, who destroyed the
Haihayas under their king Vitihavya and re-
established the kingdom of Kasi. Vitihavya,

through the protection of Bhrgu, became a
Brahmana. The Mahabharata gives a list of his
descendants, which contains several of the names
of the Kasya dynasty of the text; thus, Ghrtsamada
is said to be his son and the two last of the line are
Sunaka and Saunaka. See supra, n. 7.

१९५९ १९
