BOOK V, CHAP. 15

453

CHAPTER 15

पञ्चदशोऽध्याय:
(श्रीकृष्णमानेतुं कंसेनाक्रूरस्य प्रेषणम्)
UU उवाच

ककुद्मिनि हतेऽरिष्टे धेनुके विनिषातिते।
were निहिते aR दृते गोवर्द्धनाचले।। en
दमिते कालिये नागे ary तुङ्गतरुद्वये।
हतायां पूतनायाञ्च शकटे परिवर्ततिते।। २॥
कंसाय ATS: Ws यथावृत्तमनुक्रमात्।
यशोदादेवकीगर्भपरिवर्तताद्यशेषत:॥ ३॥

After these things had come to pass, Arista
the bull-demon and Dhenuka and Pralamba
had been slain, Govarddhana had been lifted
up, the serpent Kaliya had been subdued, the
two trees had been broken, the female fiend
Pitana had been killed, and the waggon had
been overturned, Narada went to Kansa, and
related to him the whole, beginning with the
transference of the child from Devaki to
Yasoda.

श्रुत्वा तत् सकलं कंसो नारदादू देवदर्शनात्।
aged प्रति तदा ard चक्रे सुदुर्म्मति:॥४॥

सोऽतिकोपादुपालभ्य सर्वयादवसंसदि।
जगर्हं यादवांश्चैव कार्य्यञ्चैतदचिन्तयत्॥५॥
यावन्त बलमारूढौ राम-कृष्णौ सुखालकौ।
तावदेव मया वध्यावसाध्यौ रूढ्यौवनौ।। ६॥
चाणूरोऽत्र भहायीर्य्य मुष्टिकश्च महाबल:।
एताभ्यां मल्लयुद्धेन घातयिष्यामि दुर्मदौ॥ wi
धनुर्म्महमहायागव्याजेनानीय तौ व्रजात्।
तथा तथा यतिष्यामि यास्तेते As TMT ८॥।
श्वफल्कतनयं सोऽहमक्रूरं यदुपुङ्गवम्।
तयोरानयनार्थाय प्रेषयिष्यामि गोकुलम्।। ९॥
वृन्दावनचरं घोरमादेक्ष्यामि च केशिनम्। `
तत्रैवासावतिबलस्तावुभौ घातयिष्यति। १०॥
Tt: कुवलयापीडो मत्समीपमुपागतौ।
घातयिष्यति वा गोपौ वसुदेवसुतावभौ॥ ११॥

Hearing this from Narada, Kafisa was
highly incensed with Vasudeva, and bitterly
reproached him, and all the Yddavas, in an
assembly of the tribe. Then reflecting what
was to be done, he determined to destroy both
Krsna and Rama whilst they were yet young,
and before they had attained to manly vigour:
for which purpose he resolved to invite them
from Vraja, under pretext of the solemn rite of
the lustration of arms, when he would engage
them in a trial of strength with his chief
boxers, Cantra and Mustika, by whom they
would assuredly be killed. “I will send,” he
said, “the noble Yadu, Akrira the son of
Swaphalka, to Gokula, to bring them hither: I
will order the fierce Kesin, who haunts the
woods of Vmdaban, to attack them, and he is
of unequalled might, and will surely kill them;
or if they arrive here, my _ elephant
Kuvalayapida shall trample to death these two
cow-boy sons of Vasudeva.”

WUT उवाच
इत्यालोच्य स दुष्टात्मा कंसो राम-जनार्द्दनौ।
हन्तुं कृतमतिर्वीरमक्रूरं वाक्यमब्रवीत्।। १२॥

Having thus laid his plans to destroy Rama
and Jandrdana, the impious Karsa sent for the

heroic Akrora, and said to him,
