216 THE VISNU-PURANAM
निष्पाद्यते क्रिया या q सा भवित्री विनाशिनीं॥ २३॥ तस्यात्मपरदेहेषु सतोऽप्येकमयं हि यत्।
अनाशी परमार्थस्तु प्राज्ञैभ्युपगम्यते। विज्ञानं परमार्थोऽसौ द्वैतिनोऽतत्त्वदर्शिन:॥ ३ १॥
तत्तु नाशि न सन्देहो नाशिद्रव्योपपादितम्।। २४॥ वेणुरन्ध्रप्रभेदेन भेद: षड्जादिसंज्ञित:।
तदेवाफलदं कर्म परमार्थो मतस्तव। अभेदव्यापिनो वायोस्तथा तस्य महात्मन:।। ३ २॥

भुक्तिसाधनभूतत्वात् परमार्थो न साधनम्॥ २५॥
art चैवात्मनो ya! परमार्थार्थशब्दितम्।
भेदकारि परेभ्यस्तु परमार्थो न भेदवान्।। २६॥
परमात्मात्मनोयगि: परमार्थ इतीर्य्यते।
मिथ्यैतदन्यद् द्रव्यं fe नैति तद्द्रव्यतां यत:॥ २७॥
तस्माच्छेयांस्यशेषाणि नृपैतानि न संशय:।
परमार्थस्तु भूपाल। सङ्खेषाच्छूयतां मम।। I

If you suppose that the objects to be
effected by sacrificial itcs, performed
according to the rules of the Rk, Yajur, and
Sama Vedas, be the great end of life, attend to
what I have to say. Any effect which is
produced through the causality of earth
partakes of the character of its origin, and
consists itself of clay; so any act performed by
perishable agents, such as fuel, clarified butter,
and Kusa grass, must itself be of but
temporary efficacy. The great end of life (or
truth) is considcred by the wise to be eternal;
but it would be transient, if it were
accomplished through transitory things. If you
imagine that this grcat truth is the performance
of religious acts, from which no recompense is
sought, it is not so; for such acts are the means
of obtaining liberation, and truth is (the end),
not the means. Meditation on self, again, is
said to be for the sake of supreme truth; but
the object of this is to establish distinctions
(between soul and body), and the great truth of
all is without distinctions. Union of self with
supreme spirit is said to be thc great end of all;
but this is falsc; for onc substance cannot
become substantially another.”

जन्मवृद्ध्यादिरहित आत्मा सर्वगतोऽव्यय:॥ २९॥
परज्ञानमयोऽसद्भिर्नामजात्यादिभिर्विभु::।
न योगवान्न युक्तोऽभून्नैव पार्थिव! योज्यते।। ३०॥

एकत्वं रूपभेदश्च बाह्यकर्म्मप्रवृत्तिज:।
देवादिदेवेऽपध्वस्ते नास्त्येवावरणे हि स:।॥ ३३॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:।

Objects, then, which are considered most
desirable are infinite. What the great end of all
is, you shall, monarch, briefly learn from me.
It is soul: one (in all bodies), pervading,
uniform, perfect, pre-eminent over nature
(Prakrti), exempt from birth, growth, and
decay, omniprescnt, undecaying, made up of
true knowledge, independent, and unconnected
with unrealities, with name, species, and the
rest, in time present, past, or to come. The
knowledge that this spirit, which is essentially
one, is in one’s own and in all other bodies, is
the great end, or true wisdom, of one who
knows the unity and the true principles of
things. As one diffusive air, passing through
the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as
the notes of the scale (Sharga and the rest), so
the nature of the great spirit is single, though
its forms be manifold, arising from the
consequences of acts. When the difference of
the investing form, as that of god or the rest, is
destroyed, then there is no distinction.”

NOTES

1. You ask what is Sreyas (974) not what is
Paramartha (परमार्थ:); the first means literally ‘best’,
‘most excellent’ and is here used to denote
temporary and special objects, or sources of
happiness, as wealth, posterity, power &c.; the
latter is the one great object or end of life, true
wisdom or truth, knowledge of the real and
universal nature of soul.

2. But this is to be understood as applying to the
doctrines which distinguish between the vital spirit
(Jivatma) and the supreme spirit (Paramatma), the
doctrine of the Yoga. It is here argued, that it is
absurd to talk of effecting a union between the soul
of man and supreme soul; for if they are distinct
