560

THE VISNU-PURANAM

मनसा ध्याननिष्पाद्य: समाधि: सोऽभिधीयते॥ ९ ott

When the idea of this image is firmly
retained, then he may meditate on Visnu
without his diadem, bracelets, or other
ornaments. He may next contemplate him as
having but one single limb, and may then fix
his whole thoughts upon the body to which the
limbs belong. This process of forming a lively
image in the mind, exclusive of all other
objects, constitutes Dhyana, or meditation,
which is perfected by six stages: and when an
accurate knowledge of self, free from all
distinction, is attained by this mental
meditation, that is termed Samadhi.!

विज्ञानं प्रापकं प्राप्ये परे ब्रह्मणि पार्थिव!
प्रापणीयस्तथैवात्मा प्रक्षीणाशेषभावन:॥ ९ १॥
Rae: कारणं ज्ञानं करणं तेन तस्य तत्।
fone मुक्तिकार्यं वै कृतकृत्यो निवर्त्तते।। ९ २॥
तद्भावभावनापन्नस्ततोऽसौ परमात्सना।

भवत्यभेदी भेदश्च तस्याज्ञानकृतो भवेत्।। ९ ३॥

विभेदजनके ज्ञाने नाशमात्यन्तिर्कं गते।

आत्मनो ब्रह्मणो भेदमसन्तं क: करिष्यति।। ९४॥
इत्युक्तस्ते महायोग: खाण्डिक्य। परिपृच्छत:।
संक्षेप-विस्तराभ्यान्तु किमन्यत् क्रियतां wa ९५॥

“(When the Yogi has accomplished this
stage, he acquires) discriminative knowledge,
which is the means of enabling living soul,
when all the three kinds of apprehension are
destroyed, to attain the attainable supreme
Brahma”. Embodied spirit is the user of the
instrument, which instrument 15 true
knowledge; and by it that (identification) of
the former (with Brahma) is attained®.
Liberation, which is the object to be effected,
being accomplished, discriminative knowledge
ceases. When endowed with the apprehension
of the nature of the object of inquiry, then,
there is no difference between it (individual
and) supreme spirit: difference is the
consequence of the absence of (true)
knowledge. When that ignorance which is the
cause of the difference between individual and

universal spirit is destroyed finally and for
ever, who shall ever make that distinction
between them which does not exist? Thus have
I, Khandikya, in reply to your question,
explained to you what is meant by
contemplative devotion, both fully and
summarily. What else do you wish to hear?”

खाण्डिक्य उवाच

कथिते योगसद्भावे सर्वमेव कृतं मम।

तवोपदेशेनाशेषो नष्टश्चित्तप्नलो यत:॥९६॥

ममेति यन्मया प्रोक्तमसदेतन्न चान्यथा।

ata! गदितुं शक्यमपि विज्ञेयवेदिभि:।। ९७॥

अहं ममेत्यविद्येयं व्यवहारस्तथानयो:।

परमार्थस्त्वसंलाप्यो गोचरो ATA न स:॥९८॥

wares श्रेयसे wd ममैतद्भेवता कृतम्।

यद्दिमुक्तिप्रदो art: प्रोक्त: केशिध्वजाव्यय:।। ९९॥

Khanahikya replied to Kesidhvaja, and
said, “The explanation which you have given
me of the real nature of contemplative
devotion has fulfilled all my wishes, and
removed all impurity from my mind. The
expression ‘mine,’ which I have been
accustomed to use, is untruth, and cannot be
otherwise declared by those who know what is
to be known. The words ‘1? and ‘mine’
constitute ignorance; but practice is influenced
by ignorance. Supreme truth cannot be
defined, for it is not to be explained by words.
Depart therefore, Kesidhvaja; you have done
all that is necessary for my real happiness, in
teaching me contemplative devotion, the

‘inexhaustible bestower of liberation from

existence.”

पराशर उवाच
यथार्हपूजया तेन खाण्डिक्य स पूजित:।
आजगाम पुरं ब्रह्मंस्तत: केशिध्वजो नृप:॥ Yo ०॥
खाण्डिक्योऽपि सुतं कृत्वा राजानं योगसिद्धये।
वनं जगाम गोविन्दे विनिवेशितमानस:।॥ १० १॥
तत्रैकान्तरतिर्भूत्वा यमादिगुणशोधित:।
विष्णवाख्ये निर्मले ब्रह्मण्यवाप नृपंतिर्लयम्।। १० २॥
