BOOK VI, CHAP. 2

535

पराशर उवाच
अन्यस्मिन्नेव तत् पुष्टे यथावत् कथितं त्वया॥३१॥
तत: प्रहस्य तान् Me कृष्णद्वैषायनो मुंनि:।
विस्मयोत्फुल्लनयनांस्तापसांस्तानुपागतान्।। ३ २॥
मयैष भवतां प्रश्नो ज्ञातो दिव्येन चक्षुषा।

तता fe a: प्रसङ्गेन साधु साध्विति भाषितम्।। ३ ३॥

स्वल्पेनैव प्रयत्नेन eat सिध्यति वै कलौ।

नरैरात्मगुणाम्भोभि: क्षालिताखिलकिल्विषै:।। ३४॥

wee द्विजशुश्रूषातत्परैमुनिसत्तमा:।

तथा स्त्रीभिरनाया सं पतिशुश्रूषयैव हि॥ ३५॥

ततस्तितमयप्येतन्मम धन्यतमं मतम्।

धर्म्मसंसाधने क्लेशो द्विजातीनां कृतादिषु।। ३६॥

भवद्भिर्यदभिप्रेतं तदेतत् कथितं मया।

अपृष्टेनापि धर्मज्ञा: किमन्यत् कथ्यतां द्विजा:।। ३७॥

The Munis then said to Vyasa, “The
question we intended to have asked you has
been already answered by you in your reply to
our subsequent inquiry.” On hearing which
Krsna Dvaipayana laughed, and said to the
holy persons who had come to see him, whose
eyes were wide open with astonishment, “I
perceived, with the eye of divine knowledge,
the question you intended to ask, and in
allusion to it I uttered the expressions, Well
done, well done.’ In truth, in the Kali age duty
is discharged with very little trouble by
mortals, whose faults are all washed away by
the water of their individual merits; by Stidras,
through diligent attendance only upon the
twice-born; and by women, through the slight
effort of obedience to their husbands.
Therefore, Brahmanas, did I thrice express my
admiration of their happiness; for in the Krta
and other ages great were the toils of the
regenerate to perform their duty. I waited not
for your inquiry, but replied at once to the
question you purposed to ask. Now, ye who
know what virtue is, what else do you wish me
to tell you?”

तत: संम्पूज्य ते व्यासं प्रशस्य च पुन: पुन:।
यथागतं द्विजा जग्मुर्व्यसोक्तिक्षतसंशया:॥ ३ ८॥
भवतोऽपि wernt! रहस्यं कथितं मया।। ३ ९॥
अत्यन्तदुष्टस्य कलेरयमेको महान् गुण:।
कीर्त्तनादेव कृष्णस्य FRAT: WE व्रजेत्।४०॥
यच्चाहं भवता पृष्टो जगतामुपसंहतिम्।
प्राकृतामान्तरालाञ्च तामप्येष वदामि Atv et
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे षष्ठांशे द्वितीय: अध्याय:॥

The Munis then saluted and praised Vyasa,
and, being freed by him from uncertainty,
departed as they came. To you also, excellent
Maitreya, have I imparted this secret, this one
great virtue of the otherwise vicious Kali age.
The dissolution of the world, and the

aggregation of the elements, I will now

describe to you.!
FOO

NOTES

1. The illustration of the efficacy of devotion to
Visnu given in this chapter is peculiar to this
Purana, but the doctrine is common to it and the
Bhagavata. It is repeatedly inculcated in that work.
The paralled passage in the twelfth book is the
following. “Purusottama, abiding in the hearts of
men, takes away all the sins of the Kali age,
produced by place or property. Bhagavan, abiding
in the heart, the heard, repeated, read of,
worshipped, or honoured, dissipates the ills of men
for ten thousand births. As fire, entering into the
substance of gold, purifies it from the allows with
which it is debased in the mine, so Visnu, united
with the devotee, is the refiner from all that is evil.
By learning, penance, suppression of breath,
friendship, pilgrimage, ablution, mortification,
gifts, prayer, the soul attains not that exceeding
purity which it derives from the presence of Visnu.
Therefore, with all your soul, O king, hold Kegava
ever present in your heart. Let one about to die be
most careful in this; for so he goes to supreme
felicity. Let the name of the supreme god, Visnu,
be repeated diligently by all in their last moments;
for he who desires liberation shall attain it by the
frequent repetition of the name of Krsna. Final
felicity is derived in the Krta age from holy study;
