BOOK V, CHAP. 20

471

Janarddana, and the former thus addressed

him:

aged उवाच
wate सीदतां नाथ। देवानां वरद: प्रभो।
तथावयो: प्रसादेनं कृतीद्धारश्च केशव॥ ८ १।।
आराधितो यद्भगवानवतीर्णो गृहे मम।
दुर्वृत्तनिधानार्थाय तेन a: पावितं कुलम्।। ८ २॥
त्वमत: सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतेष्ववस्थित:।
warded समस्तात्मन्। त्वत्तो भूतभविष्यती।। ८ ३॥
यशैस्त्वमिज्यसे नित्यं सर्वदेवमयाच्युत।
त्वमेव Ut यष्टा च यज्ञानां WAT ८४॥
सापह्नवं मम मनो यदेतत् त्वयि जायते।
देवक्याश्चात्मजप्रीत्या तदत्यन्तविड्म्बना।। ८५॥

“Have compassion upon mortals, O god,
benefactor and lord of deities: it is by thy
favour to us two that you have become the
(present) upholder of the world. That, for the
punishment of the rebellious, you have
descended upon earth in my house, having
been propitiated by my prayers, sanctifies our
race. You are the heart of all creatures, you
abide in all creatures; and al] that has been, or
will be, emanates from you, O universal spirit!
You, Achyuta, who comprehen all the gods,
are eternally worshipped with sacrifices: you
are sacrifice itself, and the offerer of
sacrifices. The affection that inspires my heart
and the heart of Devaki towards you, is if you
were our child, is indeed but error, and a great
delusion.

क्व oat सर्वभूतानामनादिनिधनो भवान्।

wa मे मनुष्यकस्यैषा fret पुत्रेति वक्ष्यति।। ८ ६॥

जगदेतज्जगन्नाथ! सम्भूतमखिलं यत:।

कया युक्त्या विना मायां सोऽस्मत्त: सम्भविष्यति।। ८७॥

यस्मिन् प्रतिष्ठितं ad जगत् स्थावरजङ्गमम्।

स कोष्ठोत्सङ्गशयनो मानुषाज्जायते कथम्॥८८॥

स त्वं प्रसीद wee! पाहि विश्व-
मंशावतारकरणैर्न ममासि पुत्र:।

आब्रह्मपादपमयं जगदेतदीश।
त्वं नो विमोहयसि fe परमेश्वरात्मन्॥ ८ ९॥
How shall the tongue of a mortal such as I
am call the creator of all things, who is
without beginning or end, son? Is it consistent
that the lord of the world, from whom the
world proceeds, should be born of me, except
through illusion? How should he, in whom all
fixed and moveable things are contained, be
conceived in the womb and born of a mortal
being?
मायाविमोहितदृशा तनयो ममेति
कंसाद्भयं क्रतमपास्तभयातितीव्रम्।
नीतोऽसि गोकुलमितोऽतिभयाकुलस्य
वृद्धिं गतोऽसि मम मास्ति ममत्वमीश।। ott
साध्यानि यानि न भवन्ति निरीक्षितानि।
त्वं विष्णुरीश! जगतामुकारहेतो:
प्राप्तोऽसि न: परिगतो विगतो fe मोह:॥ ९१॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे विंश: अध्याय:॥

Have compassion therefore indeed, O
supreme lord, and in thy descended portions
protect the universe. You are no son of mine.
This whole world, from Brahma to a tree, you
are. Wherefore do you, who are one with the
supreme, beguile us? Blinded by delusion, I
thought you my son ; and for you, who are
beyond all] fear, I dreaded the anger of Kansa,
and therefore did I take you in my terror to
Gokula, where you have grown up; but I no
longer claim you as mine own. You, Visnu,
the sovereign lord of all, whose actions Rudra,
the Maruts, the Asvins, Indra, and the gods,
cannot equal, although they behold them; you
who has come amongst us for 'the benefit of
the world, are recognised, and delusion is no
more.”

NOTES

1 They had their bodies smeared in the style
called Bhaktichheda (भक्तिच्छेदानुलिप्ताङ्गौ), that is, with
the separating or distinguishing (cheda) marks of
