BOOK I, CHAP. 22

137

द्वे रूपे ब्रह्मणस्तस्य मूर्त्तञ्चामूर्त्तमेव च।
क्षराक्षरस्वरूपे ते सर्वभूतेष्ववस्थिते।। ५ ४॥

अक्षरं तत् परं Te art सर्वमिदं जगत्।
एकदेशस्थितस्याग्नेर्ज्यत्स्ना विस्तारिणी यथा।। ५५॥
तत्राप्यासन्नदूरत्वाद् बहुत्वस्वल्पतामय:।
ज्योत्स्नाभेदोऽस्ति तच्छक्तेस्तद्वन्मैत्रेय विद्यते।। ५६॥

ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवा TEL प्रधाना ब्रह्मशक्तय:।

ततश्च देवा मैत्रेय न्यूना दक्षादयस्तत:॥ ५७॥

ततो मनुष्या: पशवो मृग-पक्षि-सरीसृपा:।

न्यूना न्यूनतराश्चैव वृक्ष-गुल्मादयस्तत:।॥ ५८

तदेतदक्षरं Fret जगन्मुनिवराखिलम्।

आविर्भाव-तिरोभाव-जन्म-नाश-विकल्पवत्।। ५ ९॥

There are two states of this Brahma’, one
with, and one without shape; one perishable,
and one imperishable; which are inherent in all
beings. The imperishable is the supreme being,
the perishable is all the world. The blaze of
fire burning on one spot diffuses light and heat
around, so the world is nothing more than the
manifested energy of the supreme Brahma:
and inasmuch as, Maitreya. as the light and
heat are stronger or feebler as we are near to
the fire, or far off from it, so the energy of the
supreme is more or less intense in the beings
that are less or more remote from him.
Brahma. Visnu, and Siva are the most
powerful energies of god; next to them are the
inferior deities, then the attendant spirits, then
men, then animals, birds insects, vegetables;
each becoming more and more feeble as they
are farther from their primitive source. In this
way, illustrious Brahman, this whole world,
although in essence imperishable and eternal,
appears and disappears, as if it was subject to
birth and death.

सर्वशक्तिमयो विष्णु: स्वरूपं ब्रह्मणोऽपरम्।
मूर्त्त ag योगिभि: पूर्वं योगारम्भेषु चिन्त्यते।। ६०॥
सालम्बनो महायोग: Walt यत्र संस्थित:।
मनस्यव्याहते सम्यग् युञ्जतां जायते मुने।। ६१॥

स पर: सर्वशक्तीनां ब्रह्मण: समनन्तर:।

मूर्त्त ब्रह्म महाभाग सर्वब्रह्ममयो हरि:।।६२॥

awa सर्वमिदं प्रोतमोतञ्चैवाखिलं जगत्।

Wat जगज्जगत् तस्मिन् स जगच्चाखिलं मुने।। ६ ३॥
क्षराक्षरमयो विष्णुर्विभर्त्यखिलमीश्वर:।
पुरुषाव्याकृतमयं भूषणास्त्रस्वरूपवत्।। ६४॥

The supreme condition of Brahma, which
is meditated by the Yogis in the
commencement of their abstraction, as
invested with form, is Visnu, composed of all
the divine energies, and the essence of
Brahma, with whom the mystic union that is
sought, and which is accompanied by suitable
elements, is effected’ by the devotee whose
whole mind is addressed to that object. This
Hari, who is the most immediate of all the
energies, of Brahma, is his embodied shape,
composed entirely of his essence; and in him
therefore is the whole world interwoven; and
from him, and in him, is the universe, and he,
the supreme lord of all, comprising all that is
perishable and imperishable, bears upon him
all material and spiritual existence, identified
in nature with his ornaments and weapons.

मैत्रेय उवाच
भूषणास्त्रस्वरूपस्थं यच्चैतदखिलं जगत्।
बिभर्ति भगवान् विष्णुस्तन्ममाख्यातुमर्हसि।। ६५॥

Maitreya ऽक्षत~- Tell me in what manner
Visnu bears the whole world, abiding in his
nature, characterised by ornaments and
weapons.

पराशर Say

नमस्कृत्वाप्रमेयाय विष्णवे प्रभविष्णवे।
कथयामि यथाख्यातं वसिष्ठेनं ममाभवत्।। ६६॥
आत्मानमस्य जगतो निर्लेपमगुणामलम्।

बिभर्ति कौस्तुभमणिस्वरूपं भगवान् हरि:।। ६७॥
श्रीवत्ससंस्थानधरमनन्ते च समाश्रितम्।

प्रधानं बुद्धिरप्यास्ते गदारूपेण माधवे॥६८॥

एकद्ईभव् 18]]6त-- Having offered
salutation to the mighty and indescribable
Visnu, I repeat to you what was formerly
related to me by Vasistha. The glorious Hari
