BOOK IV, 4

323

wart च सगरो हयमेधमारेभे।
तत्पुत्रैरधिष्ठितमस्याश्वं कोऽप्यपहृत्य भुवो विवरं
प्रविवेश।।८॥

ततश्चश्वान्वेषणाय तनयान् युयोज।
ततस्तत्तनयाश्चाश्वखुरपदवीमनुसरन्तोऽतिनिर्बध्धेन वसुधा-
तलमेकैको योजनं योजनमवनेश्चखान।। ९॥

ue owt परिभ्रमन्तमवनीपतिनन्दनास्ते ददृशु:।
नातिदूरस्थितञ्च भगवन्तमपघने शरत्कालेऽर्कमिव
तेजोभिरनवरतमूर्द्धवमधश्चाशेषदिशश्चोद्भासयमानं
कपिलिर्षिमपश्यन्।। १०॥

ततश्चोद्यतायुधा `ढुरात्मायमस्मदपकारी यज्ञविघातकर्त्त
arent हन्यतां हन्यता` मित्यधावन्। ततश्च तेनापि भगवता
किञ्चिदीषत्परिवर्तितलोचनेन विलोकिता:
स्वशरीरसमुत्येनाग्नि दह्यमाना विनेशु:।। ११॥

At that period Sagara commenced the
performance of the solemn sacrifice of a horse,
who was guarded by his own_ sons
nevertheless some one stole the animal and
carried it off into a chasm in the earth. Sagara
commanded his sons to search for the steed;
and they, tracing him by the impressions of his
hoofs, followed his course with perseverance,
until coming to the chasm where he had
entered, they proceeded to enlarge it and dug
downwards each for a league. Coming to
Patala, they beheld the horse wandering freely
about and at no great distance from him they
saw the Rsi Kapila sitting, with his head
declincd in meditation and illuminating the
surrounding space with radiance as bright as
the splendours of the autumnal sun, shining in
an unclouded sky. Exclaiming, "This is the
villain who has maliciously interrupted our
sacrifice and stolen the horse! Kill him! Kill
him!" They ran towards him with uplifted
weapons. The Muni slowly raised his eyes and
for an instant looked upon them and they were
reduced to ashes by the sacred flame that

darted from his person.’
सगरोऽप्यनुगम्याश्वानुसारि तत् पुत्रबलमशेषं
चोदयामास।। १२॥

तत्र च स तु सगरतनयखातमार्गेण कपिलमुपगम्य भक्तिनम्रस्तथा

wm, at वृणीष्व wa पुत्र! whe ते स्वर्गाद्
गङ्गामानयिष्यतीति।। १३॥

अथांशुमानपि ब्रह्मदण्डहतानामस्मत्पितॄणां स्वर्गाय
इत्याह॥ १४॥ ।

When Sagara learned that his sons, whom
he had sent in pursuit of the sacrificial steed,
had been destroyed by the might of the great
Rsi Kapila, he dispatched Ansumat, the son of
Asamanjas, to effect the animals’ recovery.
The youth, proceeding by the deep path which
the princes had dug, arrived where Kapila was
and bowing respectfully, prayed to him and so
propitiated him, that the saint said, "Go, my
son, deliver the horse to your grandfather, and
demand a boon; your grandson shall bring

- down the river of heaven on the earth."

Ansumat requested as a boon that his uncles,
who had perished through the  sage's
displeasure, might, although unworthy of it, be
raised to heaven through his favour.

तञ्चाह भगवान्,- उक्तमेवैतन्मया पौत्रस्ते त्रिदिवादू गङ्गां
Wee संस्पृष्टेष्वस्थिभस्मस्वेते

wae: प्रणम्य च भगव्तेऽश्च . मादाय
पितामहयज्ञमाजगाम।। १५॥
wiser तं a समापयामास।

सागरञ्चात्मजप्रीत्या पुत्रत्वे कल्पयामास।। १६॥

"I have told you," replied Kapila, "that your
grandson shall bring down upon earth the
Ganges of the gods; and when her waters shall
wash the bones and ashes of your grandfather's
sons, they shall be raised to Svarga. Such is
the efficacy of the stream that flows from the
toe of Visnu, that it confers heaven upon all
who bathe in it designedly or who even
become accidentally immersed in it; those
