258

THE VISNU-PURANAM

दूरादावसधान्मूत्रं पुरीषञ्च विसर्जयेत्।

पादावसेचनोच्छिष्टे प्रक्षिपेन्न गृहाङ्गणे।। ९॥

Let the wise man awake in the Muhirtta of
Brahma (or n the third Muhiirtta, about two
hours before sunrise) and with a composed
mind meditate on two of the objects of life
(virtue and wealth) and on topics not
incompatible with them. Let him also think
upon desirc, as not conflicting with the other
two; and thus contemplate with equal
indifference the three ends of life, for the
purpose of counteracting the unseen
consequence of good or evil acts. Let him
avoid wealth and desire, if they give
uneasiness to virtue; and abstain from virtuous
or religious acts if they involve misery or are
censured by the world.” Having risen, he must
offer adoration to the sun; and then, in the
south-east quarter, at the distance of a bow-
shot or more or any where remote from the
village, void the impurities of nature. The
water that remains after washing his feet he
must throw away into the courtyard of the
house.

गुरुद्विजातींस्तु बुधो न मेहेत कदाचन।। १०॥

न कृष्टे शस्यमध्ये वा गोव्रजे जनसंसदि।

न वर्त्मनि न नद्यादितीर्थेषु पुरुषर्षभ।। ११॥

नाप्सु नैवाम्भसस्तीरे श्मशाने न समाचरेत्।
उत्सर्गं वै पुरीषस्य मूत्रस्य च विसर्जनम्।। १२॥
उदङ्मुखो दिवा मूत्रं विपरीतमुखे निशि।
कूर्वीतानापदि प्राज्ञो मूत्रोत्सर्गञ्च पार्थिव।। १३॥
wrest वसुधां वस्त्रप्रावृतमस्तक:।
तिष्ठेन्नातिचिरं aa ta किञ्चिदुदीरयेत्॥ १४॥
वल्मीकमूषिकोत्खातां मृदमन्तर्जलां तथा।
शौचावशिष्टां गेहाच्च नादद्याल्लेपसम्भवाम्।। १५॥
अन्त:प्राण्यवपन्नां च हलोत्खाताञ्च पाथिव।
परित्यजेन्मृदो ह्येता: सकला: शौचकर्मणि।॥ १६॥

A wise man will never void urine on his
own shadow, nor on the shadow of a tree, nor
on a cow nor against the sun, nor on fire, nor

against the wind, nor on his Guru, nor men of
the three first castes; nor will he pass either
excrement in a ploughed field or pasturage or
in the company of men or on a high road or in
rivers and the like, which are holy or on the
bank of a stream or in a place where bodies are
burnt; or any where quickly. By day let him
void them with his face to the north and by
night with his face to the south, when he is not
in trouble. Let him pcrform these actions in
silence and without delay; covering his head
with a cloth and the ground with grass. Let
him not take, for the purposes of cleanliness,
earth from an ant-hill, nor a rat-hole, nor from
water, nor from the residue of what has been
so used, nor soil that has been employed to
plaster a cottage, nor such as has been thrown
up by insects or turned over by the plough. All
such kinds of earth let him avoid, as means of
purification.

एका लिङ्गे गुदे तिस्रस्तथा वामकरे दश।
हस्तद्वये च ae स्युर्मृद: शौचोपपादिका:।। gon
अच्छेनागन्धफेनेन जलेनाबुद्बुदेन च।

आचामेच्च YS भूयस्तथा दद्यात् समाहित:।। १८॥
निष्पादिताङ्ध्रिशौचस्तु पादावभ्युक्ष्य वै पुन:।

fa पिबेत् सलिलं तेन तथा द्वि: परिमार्जयेत्। een
ag नाभिञ्च तोयेन हृदयञ्चापि संस्पृशेत्।। २०॥
आचान्तस्तु तत: कुर्यात् पुमान् केशप्रसाधनम्।
आदर्शाञ्मनमाङ्गल्यं दूर्वाद्यालम्भनानि च।। २ १

One handful is sufficient after voiding
urine; three after passing ordure: then ten
handfuls are to be rubbed over the left hand
and seven over both hands. Let him then rinse
his mouth with water that is pure, neither fetid,
nor frothy, nor full of bubbles; and again use
earth to cleanse his feet, washing them well
with water. He is to drink water then three
times and twice wash his face with it; and next
touch with it his head, the cavities of the eyes,
ears and nostrils, the forehead, the navel and
the heart.’ Having finally washed his mouth, a
man is to clean and dress his hair and to
