552

THE VISNU-PURANAM

स चाचष्ट यथान्यायं द्विज! केशिध्वजाय Aq

प्रायश्चित्तमशेषेण aa वै तत्र विधीयते।। ३ ३॥

विदितार्थ: स तेनैवं सोऽनुज्ञातो महात्मना।

यागभूमिमुपाश्रित्य चक्रे सर्वा: क्रिया: क्रमात्।। ३४॥

क्रमेण विधिवद् unt नीत्वा सोऽवभृथाप्लुत:।

कृतकृत्यस्ततो भूत्वा चिन्तयामास पार्थिव: ॥३५॥

पूजिता ऋत्विज: सर्वे सदस्या मानिता मया।

तथैवार्जिनोऽध्यर्थैर्योजितोऽभिमतैर्यथा॥ ३६॥

यथार्हमस्य लोकस्य मया wd विचेष्टितम्।

अनिष्पन्नक्रियं चेतस्तथापि मम fe यथा।। ३७॥

Sit सञ्जिन्त्य यत्नेन सस्मार स महीपति:।

खाण्डिक्याय न दत्तेति मया वै गुरुदक्षिणा॥३८॥

जगाम च ततो भूयो रथमारुह्य पार्थिव:।

ara! दुर्गगनहं खाण्डिक्यो यत्र संस्थित:।।३९॥

Returning then to Kesidhwaja, Khandikya

desired him to propose his question, which he
promised to answer; and Kesidhwaja related to
him what had happened, the death of the cow,
and demanded to know what penance he
should perform. Khandikya, १ reply,
explained to him fully the expiation that was

suited to the occasion; and Kesidhwaja then,
with his permission, returned to the place of

sacrifice, and regularly fulfilled every
necessary act. Having completed the
ceremony, with its supplementary rites,

Kesidhwaja accomplished all his objects: but
he then reflected thus: The priests whom J
invited to attend have all been duly honoured;
all those who had any request to make have
been gratified by compliance with their
desires; all that is proper for this world has
been effected by me: why then should my
mind feel as if my duty had been unfulfilled?”
So meditating, he remembered that he had not
presented to Khandikya the gift that it is
becoming to offer to a spiritual preceptor, and,
mounting his chariot, he immediately set off to
the thick forest where that sage abode.
Khandikya, upon his reappearance, assumed
his weapons to kill him; but Kesidhwaja

exclaimed, “Forbear, venerable sage. I not
here to injure you, Khandikya: dismiss your
wrath, and know that I have come hither to
offer you that remuneration which is due to
you as my instructor. Through your lessons I
have fully completed my sacrifice, and I am
therefore desirous to give you a gift. Demand
what it shall be.”

watigentsty तथायान्तं पुनर्दृष्टवा धृतायुध:।

weal हन्तुं कृतमतिस्तथाह स पुनर्नृप:। voll

भो नाहं तेऽपकाराय wea: खाण्डिक्य! मा क्रुध:।

गुरोर्निष्क्रयदानाय मामवेहि त्वमागतम्॥४१॥

निष्पादितो war याग: WaT ARIANA: |

सोऽहं ते दातुमिच्छामि वृणुष्व गुरुदक्षिणाम्।। ४ २॥

भूय: स मन्तिभि: सार्द्ध मन्त्रयामास पार्थिव:।

गुरुनिष्कृतिकामोऽत्र किमयं प्रार्थ्यतामिति।॥।४३॥

तमूचुर्मन्रिणो राज्यमशेषं प्रार्थ्यतामिति।

कृतिभि: wet राज्यमनायासित सैनिकै:।।४४॥

प्रहस्य तानाह नृप: स खाण्डिक्यो महामति:।

स्वल्पकालं महीराज्यं Ta: प्रार्थ्यते कथम्।४५॥

एवमेतद्भवन्तोऽत्र ह्यर्थसाधनमन्रिण:।

परमार्थ: कथं कोऽत्र यूयं नात्र विचक्षणा:॥४६॥

Khandikya having once more commenced
with his counsellors, told them the purpose of
his rival’s visit, and asked them what he
should demand. His friends recommended him
to require his whole kingdom back again, as
kingdoms are obtained by prudent men
without conflicting hosts. The reflecting king
Khandikya laughed, and replied to them,
“Why should a person such as I be desirous of
a temporary earthly kingdom? Of a truth you
are able counsellors in the concerns of this

life, but of those of the life to come you are
assuredly ignorant.”

इत्युक्त्वा समुपेत्यैनं स तु केशिध्वजं नृपम्।
sare किमवश्यं त्वं ददासि गुरुदक्षिणाम्॥४७॥
बाढमित्येव तेनोक्त: खाण्डिक्यस्तमथाब्रवीत्।
भवानध्यात्मविज्ञानपरमार्थविचक्षण:।॥ ४ ८॥।

यदि चेद्दीयते we भवता गुरुनिष्क्य:।
