BOOK Il, CHAP. 11

259

decorate his person, before a glass, with

unguents, garlands and perfumes.
तत: स्ववर्णधर्मेण वृत्त्यर्थञ्च धनार्जनम्।
Hala श्रद्धासम्पन्नो wart पृथिवीपते।। २२॥
धने यतो मनुष्याणां यतेतातो धनार्जने।। २३॥

He is then according to the custom of his
caste, to acquire wealth, for the sake of
subsistence; and with a lively faith worship the
gods. Sacrifices with the acid juice, those with
clarified butter and those with offerings of
food, are comprehended in wealth; wherefore
let men exert themselves to acquire wealth for
these purposes.*

नदी-नद-तडागेषु देवखातजलेषु च।
नित्यक्रियार्थं स्नायीत गिरिप्रस्रवणेषु a २४॥
कूपेषूदू धृततोयेन स्नानं Fala वा भुवि।
गृहेषूद् धृततोयेन CAAT भुव्यसम्भवे।। २५॥
शुचिवस्त्रधर: स्नातो देवर्षिपितृतर्पणम्।
तेषामेव fe तीर्थेन कुर्वीत सुसमाहित:।। २६॥

As preparatory to all established rites of
devotion the household should bathe in the
water of a river, a pond, a natural channel or a
mountain torrent; or he may bathe upon dry
ground, with water drawn from a well or taken
from a river or other source, where there is any
objection to bathing on the spot.* When bathed
and clad in clean clothes, let him devoutly
offer libations to thc gods, sages and
progenitors, with the parts of the hand
severally sacred to each.

fara: प्रीणनार्थाय देवानामपवर्जयेत्।

SAO यथान्यायं सकृच्चापि प्रजापते:।। २७॥
पितॄणां प्रीणनार्थाय free: पृथिवीपते!
पितामहेभ्यश्च तथा प्रीणयेत्प्रपितामहान्॥ २ ८॥
मातामहाय तत्पित्रे तत्पित्रे च समाहित:।

दद्यात् पैत्रेण तीर्थेन काम्यञ्चन्यच्छृणुष्व मे।। २९॥
A प्रमात्रे तन्मात्रे गुरुपत्न्यै तथा za!

गुरवे मातुलादीनां स्निग्धमित्राय भूभुजे।। ३०॥

He must scatter water thrice, to gratify the
gods; as many times, to please the Rsis; and
once, to propitiate Prajapati: he must also
make three libations, to satisfy the progenitors.
He must then present, with the part of the hand
sacred to manes, water to his paternal
grandfather and great-grandfather, to his
maternal grandfather, great-grandfather and
his father; and at pleasure to his own mother
and his mother's mother and grandmother, to
the wife of his preceptor, to his preceptor, his
maternal uncle and other relations,° to a dear
friend and to the king.

इदञ्चापि जपेदम्बु दद्यादात्मेच्छया za!

उपकाराय भूतानां कृतदेवादितर्पण:॥ ३ १॥
देवासुरास्तथा यथा नागगन्धर्वराक्षसा:।

पिशाचा गुह्यका: सिद्धा: कुष्माण्डास्तरव: खगा:।। ३२
जलेचरा भूनिलया ARATE जन्तव:।

तृप्तिमेतेन यान्त्वाशु मददत्तेनाम्बुनाखिला:॥३३॥

Let him also, after libations have been
made to the gods and the rest, present others at
pleasure for the benefit of all beings, reciting
inaudibly this prayer; 'May the gods, demons,
Yaksas, serpents, Rdaksasas, Gandharvas,
Pigécas, Guhyakas, Siddhas, Kusmdandas,
trees, birds, fish, all that people the waters or
the earth or the air, be propitiated by the water
I have presented to them.

नरकेषु समस्तेषु यातनासु च ये स्थिता:।
तेषामाप्यायनायैतद्दीयते सलिलं मया।। ३४॥
ASAT बाथ्धवा वा येऽन्यजन्मनि बान्धवा:।

ते ae तृप्तिमायान्तु ये चास्मत्तोयकाङ्खिण:।। ३५॥
यत्र क्वचन संस्थानां क्षुत्तृष्णोपहतात्मनाम्।
इदमप्यक्षयञ्चास्तु मया दत्तं तिलोदकम्।। ३६॥
काम्योदक्रप्रदानन्ते मयैतत् कथितं zo!

UE दत्त्वा प्रीणयत्येतन्मनुष्य: सकलं जगत्।। ३७॥
जगदाप्यायनोद्भूतं पुण्यमाप्नोति चानघ।

Sra काम्योदकं सम्यगेतेभ्य: श्रद्धयान्वित:॥ ३ ८॥

This water is given by me for the
alleviation of the pains of all those who are
suffering in the realms of hell. May all those
