274

THE VISNU-PURANAM

on certain lunar days; and that celebrated on
occasions of rejoicing ; 34 ।
चतुर्विधनेव yeti Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 271.

2. Manu directs the balls to be made from the
remainder of the clarified butter constituting the
previous oblation to the gods. III, 215. Kulliika
Bhatta explains, however, the oblation to consist
partly of Anna (3m) food or boiled rice. The latter is
the article of which the balls chiefly consist.
Yajiiavalkya directs them to be made of rice and
sesamum-seeds. The Vayu Purana adds to these
two ingredients, honey and butter : but various
kinds of fruit, of pulse and of grain and water,
frankincense, sugar and milk, are also mixed up in
the Pindas. Their size also differs; and according to
Angiras, as quoted by Hemadri in the Sraddha
Mayitikha, they may be of the dimension of the fruit
of the jujube or of the hogplum, of the fruit of the
Bel or of the wood-apple or of a fowl's egg. Some
authorities direct Pindas of a different size for
different Sriddha; prescribing them no larger than
the wood-apple at the first or pure funereal
ceremony and as big as a cocoa-nut at the monthly
and annual Sraddha. In practice the Pinda is usually
of such a magnitude that it may be conveniently
held by the hand.

3. We have here the authority of the text for
classing the Nandimukhas amongst the Pitrs (see
Bk. III. Ch. X): the verse is, नान्दोमुख: fret: येन आद्धेन
पार्थिव। प्रीयते ay कर्त्तव्यं yes: सर्व्ववृद्धिषु।। and the same Gana
or class is presently again named ; नान्दी qa पितृगणं
पूज्येत् प्रयतो गृही। The Mantra of the Vrddhi or festival
Sriddha is also said, in the Nimaya Sindhu, to be
नाणोमुख्येभ्य: पितृभ्य: स्वाहा।। According to the authorities,
however, which are cited in that work, there seems
to be some uncertainty about the character of the
N&andimuhas; and they are addressed both as Pitrs
and gods : being in the former case either the
ancestors prior to the great grandfather, ancestors
collectively or a certain class of them; and in the
latter, being identified with the Visvadevas or a
Class of them called also Urddhavaktra. The term
Nandimukha is also applied to the rite itself or to
the Vrddhi Sraddha and to one addressed to
maternal ancestors. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 268.

4. "An oblation of water must be next presented
from the joined palm of the hand, naming; the
deceased and the family from which he sprang and

saying, ‘May this oblation reach you.” As. Res. VII.
244. The text has, aa aa स्थितायैतदमुकायेति वादिन: |

5. The proper period of mourning is ten days, on
each of which offerings of cakes and libations of
water, are to be made to the deceased, augmenting
the number of cakes each day, so that on the last
day ten cakes are presented. When the period is
shorter, the same number of ten cakes must be
distributed amongst the several days or they may be
presented on one day. Mirnaya Sindhu, p. 429.

6. It should be, more correctly, on that day
on which the mourning ceases or as previously
mentioned, the first, third, seventh or ninth ;
but the authorities vary and besides these, the
second and fourth days and certain days of the
fortnight or month, are specified. Nirnaya
Sindhu, p. 432.

7. They are no longer unclean. The Sapindas or
those connected by offerings of cakes to common
ancestors, extend to seven degrees, ascending or
descending. The Samanodakas or those similarly
connected by presentations of water, to fourteen
degrees.

8. That is, a mere guest or stranger is not to
partake of it. The food directed to be given to
Brahmanas is given in general only to the relatives
of the deceased, who are already unclean. In this
respect our text and the modern practice seem to
differ from the primitive system, as described by
Manu, III. 187. The eleventh or twelfth day is the
term on which the Sraddha which crowns the whole
of the funeral rites is to be performed and when
Brahmanas are to be invited. Nirnaya Sindhu, p.
437,

9. The number of Pindas, however, is for each
case the same or ten, Mirnaya Sindhu. p. 429.

10. So Manu, III. 251. It may be doubted if the
monthly Sraddha was part of the ancient system,
although Kullika Bhatta supposes it to be referred
to (v. 248) and supplies the fancied omission of the
text.

11. Parva, ‘first’; Madhyama, ‘middle;' and
Uttara, "last.'

KKK
