BOOK V, CHAP. 38

त्वया यत् कौरवा ध्वस्ता यदाभीरैर्भवान् जित:॥ ६९॥

गृहीता दस्युभिर्याश्च waa: शोचिता स्रिय: ।

तदप्यहं यथावृत्तं कथयामि Taga 9 0 it

Therefore has the lord departed whither he
pleased, his ends being all fulfilled. At the
period of creation the god of gods creates; in
that duration he preserves; and at the end of all
is mighty to annihilate. Now all is done.
Therefore, Arjuna, be not afflicted by the
defeat: the prowess of mortals is the gift of
time. Bhisma, Karna and other kings, have
been slain by you alone; this was the work of
time; and why, therefore, should not your
discomfiture, by those less than you are,
occur? In like manner as through your
devotion to Visnu these were overthrown by
you, so at last has your defeat by miserable
thieves been wrought by time. That divinity,
assuming various bodies, preserves the world;
and in the end the lord of creatures destroys it.
In the birth of thy fortunes Janirddana was thy
friend; in their decline, they enemies have
been favoured by Kegava. Who would have
believed that you should slay all the
descendants of Kuru, and kindred of Ganga?
Who would have believed that peasants should
triumph over you? Be assured, son of Pritha,
that it is but the sport of the universal Hari that
the Kauravas have been destroyed by you, and
that you have been defeated by herdsmen
With respect to the women whom you lament,
and who have been carried off by the thieves,
hear from me an ancient story, which will
explain why this has happened.

अष्टावक्र: पुरा विप्रो जलवासरतोऽभवत्।

बहून वर्षगणान् पार्थं गृणन् Tal सनातनम्।॥७१॥
जितेष्वसुरसङ्घेषु मेरुपृष्ठे महोत्सव:।

बभूव तत्र गच्छन्त्यो ददृशुस्तं वरस्तियं:॥७२॥
सम्भातिलोत्तमाद्याश्च शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।
तुष्ठुवुस्तं महात्मानं प्रशशंसुश्च पाण्डव।॥७३॥
आकण्ठमग्नं सलिले जटाभारधरं मुनिम्।
विनयाव्रनताश्चैनं प्रणेमु: स्तोत्रतत्परा:॥७४॥
यथा यथा प्रसन्नोऽसौ तुष्टुवुस्तं तथा तथा।

525

Taken: कौरवाश्रेष्ठ वरिष्ठं तं द्विजन्मनाम्।।७५॥

“In former times a Brahmana, named
Astavakra®, was pursuing his _ religious
penances, standing in water, and meditating on
the eternal spirit, for many years. In
consequences of the overthrow of the Asuras,
there was a great festival on the summit of
Meru: on their way to which, Rambha,
Tilottama, and hundreds and thousands of
beautiful nymphs, saw the ascetic Astavakra,
and they praised and hymned him for his
devotions. They bowed down before him, and
eulogized him, as he was immersed up to his
throat in water, his hair twisted in a braid. So
they sang in honour of him whatever they
thought would be most agreeable to that most
eminent of Brahmanas.

अष्टावक्र उवाच
प्रसन्नोऽहं महाभागा भवतीनां यदिष्यते।
मत्तस्तद्बियता सर्वं प्रदास्याम्यतिदुर्लभम्॥७६॥
रम्भातिलोत्तमाद्यास्तं वैदिक्योऽप्सरसोऽब्रुवन।
wea त्वय्यपर्याप्तं किमस्माकमिति fis oon

इतरास्त्वब्रुवन् far weal भगवान् यदि।

तदिच्छाम: पतिं org विप्रेन्द्र पुरुषोत्तमम्॥ ७ ८॥

Astavakra at last said to them, ‘I am well
pleased with you, illustrious damsels;
whatever you Wish for, ask of me, and I will
give it you, however, difficult it may be of
attainment.’ Then all those nymphs, Rambha,
Tilottama, and others, recorded in the Vedas,
replied, ‘It is enough for us that you are
pleased; what need we aught else, venerable
Brahman?’ But some amongst them said, ‘If,
exalted sir, you are indeed pleased with us,
then grant us a husband, the best of men, and
sovereign of the Brahmans.’

व्यास उवाच
एवं भविष्यतीत्युक्त्वा उत्ततार जलान्मुनि:।
ददृशुस्तास्तमुत्तीर्णं विरूपं वक्रमष्टा॥ ७ ९॥॥
तं दृष्टवा गूहमानानां यासां हास: स्फुष्टटोऽभवत्।
ता! शशाप मुनि: कोपमवाप्य कुरुनन्दन।। oll
