266 `

THE VISNU-PURANAM

or practices, not expiatory, which are enjoined
either by the Vedas or the codes of law.

2. That is, he may omit prescribed rites, if they
are attended with difficulty or danger; he may
forego ablutions, if they disagree with his health;
and he may omit pilgrimage to holy shrines, if the
way to them is infested by robbers. Again, it is
enjoined in certain ceremonies to eat meat or drink
wine; but these practices are generally reprehended
by pious persons and a man may therefore
disregard the injunction.

3. Many of these directions are given by Manu,
IV, 45,

4. That is, wealth is essential to the performance
of religious rites and it is also the consequence of
performing them. A householder should therefore
diligently celebrate them, that he may acquire
property and thus he enabled to continue to
sacrifice. According to Gautama there are seven
kinds of each of the three sorts of sacrificial rites
particularised in the text or those in which the
Soma juice, oiled butter or food are presented. Of
the latter, according to Manu, there are four

varieties, the offering of food to the Vaisvadevas,

to spirits, to deceased ancestors and to guests. II,
86. The seven of Gautama are, offerings to
progenitors on certain eighth days of the fortnight,
at the full and change, at Sraddha generally and to
the manes on the full moon of four different
months or Sravana, Agrahayana, Caitra and Asvin.

5. A person may perform his ablutions in his
own house, if the weather or occupation prevent his
going to the water. If he be sick, he may use warm
water; and if bathing be altogether injurious, he
may perform the mantra snana or repeat the prayers
used at ablution, without the actual bath.

6. The whole series is thus given by Colebrooke;
As. Res. V. 367. Triple libations of tila (sesamum
seeds) and water are to be given to the father,
paternal grandfather and great-grandfather; to the
mother, maternal grand-father, great-grandfather
and great great-grandfather; and single libations are
to be offered to the paternal and maternal grand-
mother and great grandmother, to the paternal
uncle, brother, son, grandson, daughter's son, son-
in-law, maternal uncle, sister's son, father's sister's
son, mother's sister and other relatives. With the
exception of those, however, offered to his own

immediate ancestors, which are obligatory, these
libations are optional and are rarely made.

7. The first part of this prayer is from the
Samaveda and is given by Colebrooke. As. Res. V.
367.

8. The rite is not addressed to Brahma specially,
but he is to be invoked to preside over the oblations
offered to the gods and sages subsequently
particularised.

9, Kasyapa, the son of Kasyapa, is Aditya or the
sun. Anumati is the personified moon, wanting a
digit of full. The objects and order of the ceremony
here succinctly described differ from those of
which Colebrooke gives an account (As. Res. VII.
236) and from the form of oblations given by Ward
(Account of the Hindus, 11. 447); but, as observed
by Colebrooke, "oblations are made with such
ceremonies and in such form, as are adapted to the
religious rite which is intended to be subsequently
performed." As. Res. VII. 237.

10. See also Manu, III. 84 and the As. Res. VI.
275.

11. Or this ceremony may be practised instead of
the preceding.

12. This prayer is said by Colebrooke to be taken
from the Puranas (As. Res. VII. 275): he translates
the last clause, ‘May they who gave neither food,
nor means of obtaining it.' In our text the phrase is
येषां-नैवान्नसिद्धिर्नतथान्नमस्ति। «which the commentator
explains by येषामन्नं नास्ति येषां च सत्यन्ने नात्र सिद्धि: पाकसाधनं
नास्तीत्यर्थ:। understanding Annasiddhi to mean 'means
of dressing food', Paka sadhana. The following
passages of the prayer are evidently peculiar to the
Visnu Purana.

13. Either fourteen classes of Bhitas or spirits or
the same number of living beings or eight species
of divine, one of human and five of animal
creatures.

14. This, according to the commentator, is equal
to the fourth part of Ghatika which, considering the
latter synonymous with Muhirtta or one-thirtieth of
the day and night, would be twelve minutes.

15. These precepts and those which follow, are
of the same tenor as those given by Manu on the
subject of hospitality (ITI, 99), but more detailed.

16. By stale, as applied to meat, is intended in
this place probably meat which has been previously
dressed as part of an offering to the gods or manes :
