BOOK I, CHAP. 1

5

व

left his wife Adrisyanti pregnant, and she gave birth.
to Pardésara, who was brought up by his
grandfather. When he grew up, and was informed
of his father's death, he instituted a sacrifice for the
destruction of all the Raksasas, but was dissuaded
from its completion by Vasistha and other sages or
Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu, The Mahabharata
adds, that; when he desisted from the rite, he
scattered the remaining sacrificial fire upon the
northern face of the Himalaya mountain, where it
still blazes forth at the phases of the moon,
consuming Raksasas, forests, and mountains. The
legend alludes possibly to some trans-Himalayan
volcano. The transformation of Kalmasapada is
ascribed in other places to a different cause; but he
is every where regarded as the devourer of Sakti or
Saktri, as the name also occurs. The story is told in
the Linga Puréna (Purvarddha, s. 64) in the same
manner, with the addition, conformably to the
Saiva tendency of that work, that Pardsara begins
his sacrifice by propitiating Mahadeva Vasistha's
dissuasion, and Pulastya's appearance, are given in
the very words of our text; and the story concludes,
‘thus through the favour of Pulastya and of the wise
Vasistha, Parasara composed the Vaisnava (Visnu)
Purana, containing ten thousand stanzas, and being
the third of the Purina compilations
(Puranasamhita). The Bhagavata (b. III. s. 8) also
alludes, though obscurely, to this legend. In
recapitulating the succession of the narrators of part
of the Bhagavata, Maitreya states that this first
Purana was communicated to him by his Guru
Purasara, as he had been desired by Pulastya: प्रोवाच
मह्यं स दयालुरुक्तो मुनि: पराशर:) पुलस्त्येन पुराणमाद्यम्।) ie,
according to the commentator, agreeably to the
boon given by Pulastya to Paragara, saying, "You
shall be a narrator of Puranas; `पुराणवक्ता भविष्यसि) The
Mahabharata makes no mention of ९
communication of this faculty to Paragara by
Pulastya; and as the Bhagavata could not derive this
particular from that source, it here most probably
refers unavowedly, as the Linga does avowedly, to
the Visnu Purana.

13. Pulastya, as will be presently seen, is one of
the Rsis. who were the mind-bom sons of Brahma.
Pulaha. who is here also named, is another.
Pulastya is considered. as the ancestor of the Raks
asas, as he is the father of Visravas, the father of

Ravana and his brethren, Uttara Ramdayana,
Mahabharata, Vana Parva. s. 272. Padma Purana
Linga Purana s. 63.

14. Purana samhité kartté bhavan bhavisyati.
You shall be a maker of the Samhita or
compendium of the Puranas or of the Visnu Purana,
considered as.a summary or compendium of
Pauranic traditions, in either sense it is
incompatible with the general attribution of all the
Puranas to Vy4sa.

15, Whether performing the usual ceremonies of
the Brahmanas. or leading a life of devotion and
penace. which supersedes the necessity of rites and
sacrifices.

16. These are, in fact. the brief replies to
Maitreya's six questions (p. 3). or. How was the
world created? By Visnu how will it be? At the
periods of dissolution it will be in Visnu. Whence
proceeded animate and inanimate things? From
Visnu. Of what is the substance of the world? Vis
nu. Into what has it been. and will it agnir be.
resolved? Visnu. He is therefore both the
instrumental and material cause of the universe.
‘The answer to the "whence" replies to the query as
to the instrumental cause: "He is the world” replies
to the inquiry as to the material cause:' अनेन
यत रं जगच्च स इत्युपादानप्रश्नस्योत्तरं।
‘And by this explanation of the agency of the
materiality, etc. of Visnu. as regards the universe,
(it follows that) all will be produced from, and all
will repose in him:, अनेनैव विष्णो: सर्वजगदुपादान-
eratoneaen विष्णोरेवोद्भविष्यति aa स्थास्यतीति। We
have here precisely the TO nav of the Orphic
doctrines, and we might fancy that Brucker was
translating a passage from a Purana when he
describes them in these words: "Continuisse Jovem
(lege Visnum) sive summum deum in se omnia.
omnibus orfum ex se dedisse, omnia ex se genuisse.
et ex sua produxisse essentia. Spiritum esse
universi qui omnia regit vivificat estque; ex quibus
necessario sequitur omnia in eum reditura." Hist.
Philos. I. 388. Jamblichus and Proclus also testify
that the Pythagorean doctrines of the origin of the
material world from the Deity, and its identity with
him, were much the same.—Cudworth. 1. c. p. 348.

RK
