506 THE VISNU-PURANAM

dvana. The first is usually considered to be the Khanda). Vamana Purana, and Brahma Vaivartta
modern Devicotta in the Karnatic, which is Purana (Krsna Janma Khanda).
commonly believed to be the scene of Bana's HERE
defeat. The name, however, occurs in other parts of

India; in the Dekhin, on the banks of the Godavari,

according to Wilford the capital of Munja (As. Res.

1X, 199); and in Assam, near Goalpara, as the city

of the Daityas. As. Res. XIV. 443. Hamilton notices

the remains of a city so called in Dinajpur. in the

Kalika Purana Bana is described as the friend, and

apparently neighbour, of Naraka. king of Pragjyotis

or Assam.

2 Alluding to the three stages of febrile
paroxysms, or to the recurrence of tertian ague. A
contest with this enemy, in the course of military
operations is an allegory which the British armies
in India too often illustrate.

3 The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya. Daksina, Sabhya,
and Avasathya, are the five fires; of which the three
first have a religious, and the other two a secular
character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations
at an occasional sacrifice : the second is the
household fire, to be perpetually maintained: the
third is a sacrifical fire, in the centre of the other
two, and placed to the south: the Sabhya is a fire
lighted to warm a party: and the Avasathya the
common domestic or culinary fire. Manu. Ill.
100,185, and Kulltika Bhatta's explanation.

4 Kotavi (कोरवी ) is said to be an eighth portion of
Rudrani, and the tutelary goddess of the Daityas,
composed of incantations (मन्त्रमयी). The Hari V. calls
her also Lamba and intimates her being the mother
of Bana, and as identical with Durga. The word in
the lexicons designates a naked woman, and is
thence appticable to Durga in some of her forms.

5 There can be little doubt that this legend
describes a serious struggle between the Saivas and
Vaisnavas. in which the latter, according to their
own report, were victorious : and the Saivas.
although they attempt to make out a sort of
compromise between Rudra and Krsna, are obliged
to admit his having the worst of the conflict, and
his inability to protect his votary. The Bhagavata
tells the story much as the text. The Hari V.
amplifics even more than usual, the narrative
occupying nearly seventy pages of the French
translation. The legend is to be found to the same
purport, but in various degrees of detail, in the Agni
Purana Karma Purana, Padma. Purdna (Uttara
