374

THE VISNU-PURANAM

eighty lacs (or thirty-eight millions). Who
shall enumerate the whole of the mighty men
of the Yadava race, who were tens of ten
thousands and hundreds of hundred thousands
in number?" Those powerful Daityas who
were killed in the conflicts between them and
the gods were born again upon earth as men,
as tyrants and oppressors; and in order to
check their violence, the gods also descended
to the world of mortals and became members
of the hundred and one branches of the family
of Yadu. Visnu was to them a teacher and a
ruler and all the Yadavas were obedient to his
commands.

प्रसूति वृष्णिवीराणां य: syonft नर: सदा।
स सर्वपातकैर्मुक्तो विष्णुलोर्कं प्रपद्यते॥ २६॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे agaist पञ्चदश: अध्याय:।।

Whoever listens frequently to this account
of the origin of the heroes of the race of Vrsni,
shall be purified from all sins and obtain the
sphere of Visnu.

NOTES

1. Pauravi is rather a title attached to a second
Rohini, to distinguish her from the first, the mother
of Balarama : she is also said by the Vayu to be the
daughter of Bahlika.

2. The enumeration of our text is rather
imperfect. The Vayu names the wives of Vasudeva,
Pauravi, Rohini, Madira, Rudra, Vaisakhi, Devaki;
and adds two bond-maids, Sugandhf and Vanaraji.
The Brahma Purana and Hari Varga name twelve
wives and two slaves; Rohini, Madira, Vaisakht,
Bhadra, Sundmni, Sahadeva, Santideva, Srideva,
Devaraksitaé, Wrkadevi, Upadevi, Devaki; and
Santanu and Barava. The children of the two slaves,
according to the Vayu, were Pundra, who became a
king and Kapila, who retired to the woods. In the
Bhagavata we have thirteen wives, Pauravi, Rohini,
Bhadra, Madira, Rocana, Ila, Devaki, Dhrtadevi,
Santideva, Upadevi, Srideva, Devaraksita and
Sahadeva : the last seven in this and the preceding
list are the daughters of Devaka..

3. The wives and children of Krsna are more
particularly described in the next book. The
Brahma Purana and Hari Varnsga add some details
of the descendants of Vasudeva's brothers : thus

Devabhaga is said to be the father of Uddhava;
Anadhrsti of Devasravas, a great scholar or Pandit.
Devasravas, another brother of Vasudeva, had
Satrughna and another son called Ekalavya, who
for some cause being exposed when an infant, was
found and brought up by the Nisddas and was then
termed Nisddin, Vatsavat (Vatsabalaka) and
Gandia being childless, Vasudeva gave his son
Kausika to be adopted by the former and Krsna
gave C&rudesna and three others to the latter.
Kanaka (Karundhaka) had two sons, Tantrija and
Tantripala. Avaksrinjima (Srijaya) had also two,
Vira and Agvahanu. The gracious Samika became
as the son (although the brother) of Syama and
disdaining the joint rule which the princes of the
house of Bhoja exercised, made himself paramount.
Yudhisthira was his friend. The extravagant
numbers of the Yadavas merely indicate that they
were, as they undoubtedly were, a powerful and
numerous tribe, of whom many traces exist in
various parts of India.
२९२९ १९
