BOOK I, CHAP. 17

113

That the dead are born again, and that it
cannot be otherwise, the sacred texts are
watrant: but production, cannot be without a
material cause; and as long as conception and
parturition are the material causes of repeated
birth, so long, be sure. is pain inseparable from
every period of existence. The simpleton, in
his inexperience. fancies that the alleviation of
hunger, thirst, cold. and the like is pleasure;
but of a truth it is pain; for suffering gives
delight to those whose vision is darkened by
delusion, as fatigue would be enjoyment to
limbs that are incapable of motion.’

का शरीरमशेषाणां श्लेष्मादीनां महाचय:।

क्व कान्ति-शोभा-सौरभ्य-कमनीयादयो गुणा:॥६२॥
मांसाऽसृक्पूयविण्मूत्रस्नायुमज्जाऽस्थिसंहतौ।

देहे चेत् प्रीतिमान् मूढो नरके भवितापि स:।॥ ६३॥

This vile body is a compound of phlegm
and other humours. Wherc are its beauty,
grace, fragrance, or other estimable qualitics?
The fool that is fond of a body composed of
flesh, blood, matter, ordure, urine,. membrane,
marrow, and bones will be enamoured of hell.

अग्ने: शीतेन तोयस्य तृषा भक्तस्य च क्षुधा।
क्रियते सुखकर्ततृत्वं तद् विलोमस्य चेतरै:।। ६४॥
करोति हे दैत्यसुता। यावन्मात्रं परिग्रहम्।
तावन्मात्रं स एवास्य दु:खं चेतसि यच्छति।। ६५॥
यावत: कुरुते जन्तु: सम्बन्धान् मनस: प्रियान्।
तावन्तोऽस्य निखन्यन्ते हृदये शोकशङ्कव:। ६६॥
यद् ae गृहे तन्मनसि aa तत्रावतिंष्ठत:।
नाशदाहापहरणं aa तस्यैव तिष्ठति।। ६७॥
जन्मन्यत्र महद् दु:खं म्रियमाणस्य चापि त्तत्।
यातनासु यमस्योग्रं गर्भसङ्कमणेषु च।। ६८॥

गर्भे च सुखलेशोऽपि भवद्भिरनुमीयते।

यदि ad कथ्यतामेवं ad दु:खमयं STN ६९॥

The agreeableness of fire is caused by cold;
of water, by thirst; of food, by hunger: by
other circumstances their contraries are
equally agreeable.* The child of the Daitya

who takes to himself a wife introduces only so
much misery into his bosom; for as many as

are the cherished affections of a living
creature, SO many are the thorns of anxiety
implanted in his heart; and he who has large
possessions in his house is haunted, wherever
he goes, with the apprehension that they may
be lost or burnt or stolen. Thus there is great
pain in being born: for the dying man there are
the tortures of the judge of the deceased, and
of passing again into the womb. If you
conclude that there is little enjoyment in the
embryo state, you must then admit that the
world is made up of pain.

तदेवमतिदु:खानामास्मदेऽत्र भवार्णवे।

भवतां कथ्यते सत्यं विष्णुरेक: परायणम्।॥७०॥
मा जानीत वयं बाला देही देहेषु शाश्वत:।
जरा-यौवन-जन्माद्या THAT देहस्य नात्मन:॥७१॥
बालोऽहं तावदिच्छातो यतिष्ये श्रेयसे युवा।
युवाहं वार्द्धके प्राप्ते करिष्याम्यात्मनो हितम्।।७२॥

Verily I say to you that in this ocean of the
world, this sea of many sorrows, Visnu is your
only hope. If you say, you know nothing of
this; ‘we are children; embodied spirit in
bodies is eternal; birth, youth, decay, are the
properties of the body, not. of the soul.’ But it
is in this way that we deceive ourselves. ‘I am
yet a child; but it is my purpose to exert
myself when I am a youth. I am yet a youth;
but when I become old 1 will do what is
needful for the good of my soul.

वृद्धोऽहं मम कर्माणि समस्तानि न गोचरे।

fa करिष्यामि मन्दात्मा समर्थेन न यत् कृतम्।७३॥
एवं दुराशयाक्षिप्तमानस: पुरुष: सदा।
श्रेयसोऽभिसुखं याति न कदाचिदू पिपासित:।। ७४॥
बाल्ये क्रीडनकासक्ता यौवने विषयोन्मुखा:।

अज्ञा नयन्त्यशक्त्या च वार्द्धकं समुपस्थितम्।॥७५॥
तस्मादू बाल्ये विवेकात्मा यतेत श्रेयसे सदा।
बाल्य-यौवन-वृद्धाद्यैर्देहभावैरसंयुत:॥ 9G

I am now old, and all my duties are to be
fulfilled. How shall I, now that my faculties
fail me do what was left undone when my
strength was unimpaired?’ In this manner do
men, whilst their minds are distracted by
