BOOK HU, CHAF8

189

सूर्यो ज्योति:सहस्रांशुस्तया दीप्यति भास्कर:॥४९॥
ओङ्कारो भगवान् विष्णुस्निधामा वचसां पति:।
तदुच्चारणतस्ते तु विनाशं यान्ति राक्षसा:॥५०॥
वैष्णवोऽंश: परं सूर्यो योऽन्तर्ज्यतिरसंप्लवम्।
अभिधायक ओङ्कारस्तस्य TSH: पर:॥५१॥

तेन waited ज्योतिरोङ्कारेणाथ दीप्तिमत्।
दहत्यशेषरक्षांसि मन्देहाख्यानि तानि वै॥ ५ २॥
तस्मान्नोल्लङ्घनं कार्यं सन्ध्योपासनकर्मण:।

स हन्ति सूर्यं सन्ध्यायां नोपास्ति Har तु य:।।५३॥
तत: प्रयाति भगवान् ब्राह्मणैरभिरक्षित:।
बालखिल्यादिभिश्चैव जगत: पालनोद्यत:॥ ५४॥

The night is called Us, and the day is
denominated Vyusta. and the interval between
them is called Sandhya. On the occurrence of
the awful Sandhya, the terrific fiends termed
Mandehas attempt to devour the sun; for
Brahmdé denounced this curse upon them, that,
without the power to perish, they should die
every day (and revive by night), and therefore
a fierce contest occurs daily between them and
the sun.” At this season pious Brahmanas
scatter water, purified by the mystical Omkara,
and consecrated by the Gayatri;'? and by this
water, as by a thunderbolt, the foul fiends are
consumed. When the first oblation is offered
with solemn invocations in the morning rite,'*
the thousand-rayed deity shincs forth with
unclouded splendour. Omk4ra is Visnu the
mighty, the substance of the three Vedas, the
lord of speech; and by its enunciation those
Raksasas are destroyed. The sun is principal
part of Visnu, and light is his immutable
essence, the active manifestation of which is
excited by the mystic syllable Om. Light
effused by the utterance of Omkara becomes
radiant, and burns up entirely the Rakgasas
called Mandehas. The performance of the
Sandhya (the morning) sacrifice must never
therefore be delayed, for he who neglects it is
guilty of the murder of the sun. Protected thus
by the Brahmanas and the pigmy sages called
Balakhilyas, the sun goes on his course to give
light to the world.

काष्ठा निमेषा दश पञ्च चैव।
त्रिंशच्च काष्ठा गणयेत् कलाञ्च।
fg कलाश्चैव भवेन्मुहूर्त्त-
स्तैस्नरिशता रात्र्यहनी समेते।। ५५॥
ह्रासवृद्धी त्वहर्भागैर्दिवसानां यथाक्रमम्।
सन्ध्या YEA वै ह्रासव्रद्धौ WAT BAT ५६॥
लेखात् प्रभृत्यथादित्ये त्रिमुहूर्त्तगते तु वै।
प्रात: स्मृतस्तत: कालो APNE: A पश्चम:।। ५७॥
a: WRAL कालात् त्रिमुहूर्त्तस्तु AEA: |
मध्याह्नस्निमुहूर्त्तस्तु तस्मात् कालात् तु सङ्गवात्॥५८॥
तस्मान्माध्याह्निकात् कांलादपराह्न इति स्मृत:।
त्रय एव Wawel कालभाग: स्मृतो बुधै:।
अपराह्णे व्यतीते तु काल: सायाह्नं एव च।। ५९॥
दशपञ्चमुहूर्त्तहे मुहूर्त्तसत्रय va च।
दशपञ्चमुहूर्त्त वै अहर्वैषुवतं स्मृतम्।। ६०॥
वर्द्धतेऽहो ह्रसेच्चैवाप्ययने दक्षिणोत्तरे।
अहस्तु wad रात्रिं रात्रिर्सति वासरम्।। ६ १
शरद्दसन्तयोर्मध्ये विषुवन्तु विभाव्यते।
तुलामेषगते भानौ समरात्रिदिनन्तु तत्॥ ६ २॥
कर्कटावस्थिते भानौ दक्षिणायनमुच्यते।
उत्तरायणमप्युक्तं मकरस्थे दिवाकरे॥ ६ 31
Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimesas)
make a Kasthda; thirty Kasthas, a Kala; thirty
Kaldas, a Muhirtta (forty-eight minutes); and
thirty Muhirttas, a day and night: the portions
of the day are longer or shorter, as has been
explained; but the Sandhya is always the same
in increase, or decrease, being only one
Muhirtta.'* From the period that a line may be
drawn across the sun (or that half his orb is
visible) to the expiration of three Muhirttas
(two hours and twenty-four minutes), that
interval is called Pratar (morning), forming a
fifth oration of the day. The next portion, or
three Muhirttas from morning, is termed
Sangava (forenoon): the three next Muhirttas
constitute mid-day: the afternoon comprises

the next three Muhirttas: he three Muhirttas
following are considered as the evening: and
