320

THE VISNU-PURANAM

atriya races, he deprived of the established
usages of oblations to fire and the study of the
Vedas; and thus separated from religious rites
and abandoned by the Brahmanas, these
different tribes became Mlecchhas. Sagara,
after the recovery of his kingdom, reigned
over the seven-zoned earth with undisputed
dominion"®.

NOTES

1. So Manu; “Having reposited, as the law
directs, the holy fires in his breast," VI.25.

2. The Vayu, Linga, Kiirma and Bhagavata agree
in this series; the others omit it.

3. The words of the text are, तस्माद्विरितो यतोऽङ्खिरसो
हारिता:। and the commentator explains the phrase,
‘the Angiras Brahmanas, of whom the Harita family
was the chief.’ The Linga reads, हरितो युवनाश्वस्य हारिता
यत आत्मजा:। एते DAI क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातय:॥ ‘Harita was
the son of Yuvanasva, whose sons were the Haritas;
they were on the part (or followers) of Angiras and
were Brahmanas with the properties of Ksatriyas.'
The Vayu has, हरितो युवनाश्वस्य हारीतो भूरय:स्मृता:। एते
ह्यङ्गिरस: पुत्रा: क्षत्रोपेता द्विजातय:॥ ‘Harita was the son of
Yuvanasva, from whom were many called Haritas;
they wcre sons of Angiras and Brahmanas with the
properties of Ksatriyas.' The Bhagavata has only,
मान्धातृप्रवरा इमे। These (Ambarisa, Purukutsa and
Harita) were, according to Sridhara Svami's
comments, the chiefs of Mandhatri's descendants,
being founders of three several branches; or it may
mean, he says, merely that they had Mandhatri for
their progenitor, Mandhatri being by some also
named Angiras, according to Asvalayana. It may be
questioned if the compilers of the Puranas or their
annotators, knew exactly what to make of this and
similar phrases, although they were probably
intended to intimate that some persons of Ksatriya
origin became the disciples of certain Brahmanas,
particularly of Angiras and afterwards founders of
schools of religious instruction themselves.
Mandhatri himself is the author of a hymn in the
Regveda. As. Res. VIII.385. Harita is the name of an
individual sage, considered as the son of Cyavana
and to whom a work on law is attributed. It is
probably rather that of a school, however, than of
an individual.

4, Narmada, the personified Narmada river, was
according to the Bhagavata, the sister of the Nagas.

5. We have some varieties here. Instead of
Trasadasyu the Matsya has Dussaha, whom it
makes the husband of Narmada and father of
Sambhtti, the father of Tridhanvan. The Bhagavata
omits Samhiiti; the Liiga makes him the brother of
Trasadasyu; and the Agni has in his place
Sudhanvan.

6. Vrsadasva : Vayu. The Matsya, Agni and
Brahma omit all between Sambhita and
Tridhanvan. The Bhagavata has a rather different
series or Aranya, Haryyasva, Aruna, Tribandhana,
Triganku. As Anaranya is famous in Hindu story
and Trayyaruna is a contributor to the Rgveda, their
omission shows careless compilation.

7. The Vayu states he was banished by his father
for his wickedness (Adharama). The Brahma
Purana and Hari Varnsa details his iniquity at
length; and it is told more concisely in the Linga.
He carried off the betrothed wife of another man,
one of the citizens according to the two former of
Vidarbha according to the latter : for this, his
father, by the advice of Vasistha, banished him and
he took refuge with Svapakas. The Ramayana has a
different story and ascribes Triganku's degradation
to the curse of the sons of Vasistha, to whom the
king had applied to conduct his sacrifice, after their
father had refused to do so. Before that, he is
described as a pious prince (सत्यवादी जितेन्द्रिय:) and
the object of his sacrifice was to ascend to heaven.

8. The occurrence of the famine and Satyavrata's
care of the wife and family of Visvamitra, are told,
with some variations, in the Vayu, which has been
followed by the Brahma and Hari Varga. During
the famine, when game fails he kills the cow of
Vasistha; and for the three crimes of displeasing his
father, killing a cow and eating flesh not previously
consecrated, he acquires the name of Trisanku (tri,
‘three’, Sanku, 'sin'). Vasistha refusing to perform
his regal inauguration, Visvamitra celebrates the
rites and on his death elevates the king in his mortal
body to heaven. The Ramayana relates the same
circumstance, but assigns to it a different motive.
Visvamitra's resentment of the gods to attend
Triganku sacrifice. That work also describes the
attempt of the gods to cast the king down upon
earth and the compromise between them and
Visgvamitra, by which Triganku was left suspended,
