BOOK V, CHAP. 10

Tasos wed aay a efea:1
वर्त्तयामोपयुञ्जानास्तर्पयामश्च दॆवता:॥ २०॥
क्षीरवत्य इमा गावो वत्सवत्यश्च निर्वृता:।

तेन संवद्धितै: weal: पुष्टास्तुष्टा भवन्ति वै।। २१॥
दृश्यते यत्र दृश्यन्ते वृष्टिमन्तो बलाहका:॥ २२॥
भौममेतत् पायो दुग्धं गोभि: सूर्यस्य वारिद:।
पर्शन्य: सर्वलोकस्य भवाय भुवि वर्षति।। २३॥
तस्मात् प्रावृषि राजान: Hs शक्रं मुदा युता:।
महै: सुरेशमर्चन्ति वयमन्ये च मानवा:।। २४॥

Nanda replied to his question and said,
‘‘Satakratu or Indra is the sovereign of the
clouds and of the waters : sent by him, the
former bestow moisture upon the earth,
whence springs the grain, by which we and all
embodied beings subsist; with which also and
with water, we please the gods : hence too
these cows bear calves and yicld milk and are
happy and well nourished. So when the clouds
are scen distended with rain, the earth is
neither barren of corn, nor bare of verdure, nor
is man distressed by hunger. Indra, the giver of
water, having drunk the milk of earth by the
solar ray, sheds it again upon the earth for the
sustenance of all the world. On this account all
sovereign princes offer with pleasure
sacrifices to Indra at the end of rains and so
also do we and so do other people.”

पराशर उवाच
कोपाय त्रिदशेन्द्रस्य WE दामोदरस्तदा।॥। २५॥
न वयं alana वाणिज्यजीविनो न च।
गावोऽस्मद्दैवतं Wet! वयं वनचरा यत:॥ २६॥
आन्वीक्षिकी त्रयी art दण्डनीतिस्तथापरा।
विद्याचतुष्टयं त्वेतत् वार्त्तमत्र शृणुष्व मे।। २७॥
कृषिर्वणिज्या way तृतीयं पशुपालनम्।
विद्यां ह्येता महाभाग। ant व्रत्तित्रयाश्रय:।। २८॥
अस्माकं गा: परा वृत्तिवारत्ताभेदैरियं त्रिभि:।। २९॥

441

Paragara said~ When Krsna heard this
speech from Nanda in regard to the worship of
Indra, he determined to put the king of the
celestials into a passion and replied, ‘“We,
father, are neither cultivators of the soil, nor
dealers in merchandise; we are sojourners in
forests and cows are our divinities. There are
four branches of knowledge, _ logical.

scriptural, practical and political’, Hear me

describe what practical science is Agriculture,
commerce and tending of cattle; the
knowledge of these three professions
constitutes practical science. Agriculture is the
subsistence of farmers; buying and selling, of
traders. Kine are our support. Thus the
knowledge of means of support is threefold.

विद्यया यो यया युक्तस्तस्य स tad महत्।

सैव पूज्यार्घनीया च सैव तस्योपकारिका।। 3 ot
योऽन्यस्य फलमश्नन् वै पूजयत्यपरं नर:।

इह च प्रेत्यचैवासो ara! नाप्नोति शोभनम्॥ ३ १॥
कृष्यन्ता प्रथिता सीमा सीमान्तंञ्च पुनर्वनम्।
वनान्ता गिरय: सर्वे ते चास्माकं परा गति:॥ ३ २॥
न द्वारब्धावरणा न गृहक्षेत्रिस्तथा।

सुखिन: सकले लोके यथा वै चक्रचारिण:।॥ ३३॥
श्रूयन्ते गिरयश्चामी वनेऽस्मिन् कामरूपिण:।
तत्तद्रूपं समास्थाय रमन्ते स्वेषु सानुषु।। ३४॥

यदा चैतेऽपराध्यन्ते तॆषां ये काननौकस:।

तदा सिंहादिरुपैस्तान् घातयन्ति महीधरा:॥ ३५॥

The object that is cultivated by any one
should be to him as his chief divinity; that
should be venerated and worshipped, as it is
his benefactor. He who worships the deity of
another and diverts from him the reward that is
his due, obtains not a prosperous station either
in this world or in the next. Where the land
ceases to be cultivated there are bounds
assigned, beyond which commences the forest;
the forests are bounded by the hills and so far
do our limits extend. We are not shut in with
doors, nor confined within walls; we have
neither fields nor houses; we wander about
happily wherever we list, travelling in our
