BOOK IV, 19

383

connecting them with the line of Puru instead of
-,yu3, in opposition to all authority. Again, we have
a notable piece of confusion and Suhotra the son of
Vitatha is made the father of Vrhat, the father of the
three princes who in our text and in the Hari Varhsa
(c. 20) are the sons of Hastin; and amongst whom
Ajamidha is made the father of Jahnu and ancestor
of the Kausikas, instead of being, as in c. 27 and as
every where else, of the family of Amavasu. The
source of all this confusion is obvious. The
compilers extracted all the authentic traditions
accurately enough, but, puzzled by the identity of
name, they have also mixed the different accounts
together and caused very absurd and needless
perplexity. It is quite clear also that the Hari Varnsa
does not deserve the pains taken and taken
fruitlessly, by Hamilton and M. Langlois to reduce
it to consistency. It is of no weight whatever as an
authority for the dynasties of kings, although it
furnishes some particular details, which it has
picked up possibly from authentic sources not now
available.

24. It was finally ruined by the encroachments of
the Ganges, but vestiges of it were, at least until
lately, to be traced along the river, nearly in a line
with Delhi, about sixty miles to the east.

25. In one place, son of Suhotra; in another,
grandson of Hastin : Mahabharata.

26. The copies agree in this reading, yet it can
scarcely be correct. K.anva has already been noticed
as the son of Apratiratha. According to the
Bhagavata, the elder son of Ajamidha was
Priyamedhas, from whom a tribe of Brahmanas
descended. The Matsya has Vrhaddanus and names
the wife of Ajamidha, Dhtimini. It also however,
along with the Vayu, makes Kanva the son of
Ajamidha by his wife Kesini.

27. Vrhaddanus Bhagavata.
Vrhaddarman : Hari Varhsa.

28. Vrhatkaya : Bhagavata.

29. Satyajit : Hari Vamsa.

30. ASvajit : Matsya, Visada : Bhagavata.

Also called

31.  Bhagavata  Matsya Hari Varhsa
RuciraSva_ —- Rucirasva Rucira
Kasya Kasya Svetaketu
Drdhahanu Drdhasva Mahimnara
Vatsa Vatsak.of Vatsak. of
Avanti. Avanti.

32. Kampilya appears to be the Kampil of the
Mohammedans, situated in the Doab. It was
included in southern P&ficala. The Matsya makes
Samara the son of Kasya.

33. Vibhraja in MSS., also in the Vayu,

34. The Bhagavata omits the descents
subsequent to Nipa and makes Brahmadatta the son
of Nipa by Sukrti. In the Hari VarhSa is a curious
legend of the different transmigrations of
Brahmadatta and his six companions, who were
successively as many Brahmanas, then foresters,
then deer, then water-fowl, then swans and finally
Brahmanas again, when with the king they obtained

liberation. According to the Bhagavata,
Brahmadatta composed a treatise on the Yoga, a
Yogatantra.

35, Dandasena : Hari Vamésa.

36, Bhallaka : Vayu. Bhallada : Bhagavata. The
Vayu makes him the last of the race. The Hari
Varnga adds that he was killed by Karna. The
Matsya names his successor Janamejaya, when the
race of the Nipas was exterminated by Ugrayudha;
as noticed below.

37. So the Vayu and Bhiagavata. The Matsya and
Hari Varhsa, with less consistency, derive this
family also from Ajamidha.

38. Krtimat ; Bhagavata.

39. Between these two the Vayu inserts Mahat
and Rukmaratha. The Matsya, Sudhanvan,
Sarvabhauma., Mahapaurava and Rukmadhara. The
Brahma Purana, Sudharman, Sarvabhauma, Mahat
and Rukmaratha.

40. The Bhagavata says he was the author of six
Samhitas of the Samaveda. (See Bk. III. Ch. VI).

41. The Hari Varnga says he killed Nipa, the
grandfather of Prsata, but it had previously stated
that it was the son of Bhallata, several descents
after Nipa, who was killed by Ugrayudha : and
again (c. 32), Pyrsata, conformably to other
authorities, appears as the father of Drupada, in the
family of Sriijaya. The Hari Vamsa relates the
destruction of Ugrayudha by Bhisma, in
consequence of his demanding in marriage the
widow of Santanu : after which, Prsata, it is said,
recovered possession of Kampilya.

42. Purafijaya : Bhagavata.

43. Purujati ; Vayu. Puruja : Bhagavata. The
Brahma Purana and Hari VarhSa omit Nila and
Santi.
