BOOK V, CHAP. .37

517

through my favour. When the race of Yadu
shall have perished, I shall proceed to heaven;
and the ocean shall inundate Dvaraka, when I
have quitted it."

पराशरं उवाच
इत्युक्त: प्रणिपत्यैनं जगामाथ तदोद्धव:।
नर-नारायणस्थानं केशवेनानुमोदित:॥ ३५॥
WAM यादवा: As रतानारुह्य शीघ्रगान्।
प्रभासं प्रययु: सार्द्ध कृष्ण-रामादिभिद्दिज।। ३ ६॥
प्राप्य प्रययु: प्रयता: स्नातास्ते PTT: |
चक्रुस्तत्र सुरापानं वासुदेवानुमोदिता: ॥३७॥
पिबतां तत्र वै तेषां संघर्षेण परस्परम्।
SAAR TH कलहाग्नि: क्षयावह:॥ ३ ८॥
Wey: परस्परं ते तु शस्त्रैर्दैवबलात् कृता:।
क्षीणशस्त्राश्च जगूहु: प्रत्यासन्नामथैरकाम्।।३९॥

Paragara continued— Accordingly Uddhava,
thus instructed by Kegava, saluted him with
veneration, and departed to the shrine of
Naranarayana.* Then the Yadavas ascended
their rapid cars, and drove to Prabhisa,’ along
with Krsna, Rama, and the rest of their
chiefs.!° They bathed there, and, excited by
Vasudeva, the Kukkuras and Andhakas
indulged in liquor. As they drank, the
destructive flame of dissension was kindled
amongst them by mutual collision, and fed
with the fuel of abuse. Infuriated by the divine
influence, they fell upon one another with
missile weapons, and when those were
expended, they had recourse to the rushes
growing nigh.

एरका तु गृहीता तैर्वज्रभूतेव लक्ष्यते।

तया परस्परं जघ्नु: सम्प्रहारे सुदारुणे।। ४०॥
प्रद्युम्न-शाम्बप्रमुखा: कृतवर्माथ सात्यकि:।
अनिरुद्धादयश्चान्ये पृथुर्विपृथुरेव च।। ४१॥
चारुवर्मा चारुकश्च तथाक्रूरादयो द्विज।
एरकारूपिभिर्वज्रस्तै निजघ्नु: परस्परम्।।४२॥
निवारयामास हरिर्यादवांस्ते च केशवम्।
सहायं मेनिरे प्राप्तं ते निजघ्नु: परस्परम्॥४३॥

कृष्णोऽपि कुपितस्तेषामेरकामुष्टिमाददे।

वधाय सोऽपि मुसलं मुष्टिर्लोहोऽभवत्तदा।। ४४॥
जघान तेन नि:शेषान् यादवानाततायिन:।
जघ्नुश्च सहसाभ्येत्य तथान्ये च परस्यरम्।। ४५॥
ततश्चार्णवमध्येन जैत्रोऽसौ चक्रिणो रथ:।

पश्यतो दारुकस्याशु हृतोऽश्वैरद्दिजसत्तम।। ४६॥

चक्रं तथ गदा शार्ङ्ग तूणौ शङ्खोऽसिरेव च।
प्रदक्षिणं हरिं कृत्वा जग्मुरादित्यवर्त्मना॥४७॥
क्षणेन नाभवत् कश्चिद् यादवानामघातित:।
ऋते कृष्णं महाबाहुं दारुकञ्च महामुने।। ४८॥
चङ्कम्यमाणौ at we वृक्षमूलकृतासनम्।

ददृशाते मुखाचास्य निष्क्रामन्तं महोरगम्।।४९॥

निष्क्रम्य स:मुखात्तस्य महाभोगो भुजङ्गम:।
प्रययावर्णवं सिद्धै: स्तूयमानस्तथोरगै:।। ५०॥
ततोऽर्ध्यमादाय तदा wee: सम्मुखं aah
प्रविवेश च तत्तोयं पूजित: पन्नगोत्तमै:।। ५ १॥

The rushes in their hands became like
thunderbolt!, and they struck one another with
their fatal blows. Pradyumna, Samba,
Kritavarman, Sdtyaki, Aniruddha, Prithu,
Viprithu, Chatuvarman, Charuka, Akrira, and
many others, struck one another with the
rushes, which had assumed the hardness of
thunderbolts.'' Kegava interposed to prevent
them, but they thought that he was taking part
with each severally, and continued the
conflict. Krsna then enraged took up a handful
of rushes to destroy them, and the rushes
became a club of iron, and with this he slew
many of the murderous Yddavas; whilst
others, fighting fiercely, put an end to one
another. The chariot of the holder of the
discus, named Jaitra, was quickly carried off
by the swift steeds, and swept away by the sea,
in the sight of Daruka the charioteer. The
discus, the club, the bow, the quiver, the shell,
and the sword of Keégava, having
circumambulated their lord, flew along the
path of the sun. In a short time there was not a
single Yadava left alive, except the mighty Krs
na and Daruka.'*» Going towards Rama, who
