480

THE VISNU-PURANAM

entered a large cavern, where Mucukunda, the
king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana
entering the cave, and beholding a man lying
asleep there, concluded it must be Krsna and
kicked him; at which Mucukunda awoke, and
casting on him an angry glance, the Yavana
was instantly consumed, and reduced to ashes.
For in a battle between the gods and demons,
Mucukunda had formerly contributed to the
defeat of the latter; and, being overcome with
sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon that he
should enjoy a long repose. “Sleep long and
soundly,” said the gods; “and whoever disturbs
you shall be instantly burnt to ashes by fire

emanating from your body*.”

एवं दग्ध्वा स तं पापं दृष्टवा च मधुसूदनम्।
कस्त्वमित्याह सोऽप्याह जातोऽहं शशिन:कुले।
वसुदेवस्य तनयो यदेवंशसमुद्भव:॥ २३॥
भुचुकुन्दोऽपि त्तत्रासौ वृद्धगार्ग्यवयोऽस्मरत्।
संस्मृत्य प्रणिपत्यैनं सर्वभूतेश्वरं हरिम्।। २४॥
प्राह Wat wary विष्णोरंशस्त्वं परमेश्वर:।
पुरा weer कथितमष्टाविंशतिमे युगे।
द्वापरान्ते हरेर्जन्म यदोर्वशे भविष्यति।। २५॥

स त्वं प्राप्तो न सन्देहो मर्त्यनामुषकारकृत्।
तथापि सुमहत् तेजो नालं सोढुमहं TaN २६॥
तथाहि सजलाम्भोद-नादधीरतरं तव।

वाक्यं नमति चेवोर्वीं यस्य पादप्रपीडिता।। २७॥
देवासुरे महायुद्धे दैत्यसैन्ये weet:

न शेकुर्मम तत्तेजस्त्वतेजो न सहाम्यहम्॥ २८॥

Having burnt up the iniquitous Yavana, and
beholding the foe of Madhu, Mucukunda
asked him who he was, I am born," he replied,
"in the lunar race, in the tribe of Yadu, and am
the son of Vasudeva." Muchukuda,
reccliccting the prophecy of old Garga fell
down before the lord of all, Hari, saying, “You
are known, supreme lord, to be a portion of
Visnu; for it was said of old by Garga, that at
the end of the twenty-eighth Dwapara age Hari
would be born in the family of Yadu. You are

he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind;
for thy glory I am unable to endure. Thy words

are of deeper tone than the muttering of the
rain cloud; and earth sinks down beneath the
pressure of thy feet. As in the battle between
the gods and demons the Asuras were unable
to sustain my lustre, so even am I incapable of
bearing thy radiance.

स प्रसीद woaitigal हर ममाशुभम्॥ २९॥

त्वं पयोनिधय: vet: सरितस्त्वं वनानि a

मेदिनी गगनं वायुरापोऽग्निस्त्वं तथा मन:॥३०॥

बुद्धिरव्याकृतं प्राणा: प्राणेशस्त्वं तथा पुमान्।

पुंस: परतरं यच्च व्याप्यजन्माविकारि यत्॥ ३ १॥

शब्दादिहीनमजरममेयं क्षयवर्जितम्।

अवृद्धिनाशं तद्ब्रह्म त्वमाद्यन्तविवर्जितम्।। ३ २॥

त्वन्तोऽमरा: सपितरो यक्ष-गनधर्व-किन्नरा:।

सिद्धाश्चाप्सरसस्त्वत्तो मनुष्या: THA: खगा:।। ३३॥

सरीसृपा मृगा: wa wa: Te महीरुहा:।

यच्च भूतं भविष्यञ्च किञ्चिदत्र चराचरम्॥ ३४॥

तत्सर्वं त्वं जगत्कर्तता नास्ति किञ्चित् त्वया विना॥ ३५॥

You alone are the refuge of every living
being who has lighted on the world. Do you,
who are the alleviator of all distress, show
favour upon me, and remove from me all that
is evil. You are the oceans, the mountains, the
rivers, the forests: you are earth, sky, air,
water, and fire: you are mind, intelligence, the
unevolved principle, the vital airs, the lord of
life-the soul; all that is beyond the soul; the
all-pervading; exempt from the vicissitudes of
birth; devoid of sensible properties, sound and
the like: undecaying, illimitable, imperishable,
subject neither to increase nor diminution: you
are that which is Brahma, without beginning
or end. From you the immortals, the
progenitors, the Yaksas, Gandharbhas, and
kinnaras, the Siddhas, the nymphs of heaven,
men, animals, birds, deer, reptiles, and all the
vegetable world, proceed; and all that has
been, or will be, or is now, moveable or fixed.
All that is amorphous or has form, all that is
subtile, gross, stable, or moveable, you are, O
