484

THE VISNU-PURANAM

आघ्राय मदिरातर्षमवापाथ पुरातनम्॥५॥

तत: कदम्बात् सहसा मद्यधारां स लाङ्गली।
पतन्तीं वीक्ष्यं ta! प्रययो परमां मदुम्॥६॥
पपौ च गोपगोपीभि: समवेतो मुदान्वित:।
प्रगीयमानो ललितं गीतवाद्यविशारदै:।।७॥
समन्तोत्पन्नधर्माम्भ: कणिकामौक्तिकोज्ज्वल:।
आगच्छ TET! स्नातुमिच्छामीत्त्याह gee
तस्य वाचं नदी सा च मत्तोक्तामवमत्य वै।

नाजगाम At: Hal हलं जग्राह लाङ्गली।॥ ९॥
पापे नायासि नायासि गम्यतामिच्छयात्मन:॥ १०॥
सा कृष्टा तेन सहसा मार्गं सन्त्यज्य निम्नगा।
यत्रास्ते बलभद्रोऽसौ प्लावयामास तद्वनम्॥ VI

Whilst the mighty Sesa' the upholder of the
globe, was thus engaged in wandering amidst
the forests with the herdsmen, in the disguise
of a mortal—having rendered great services to
earth, and still considering what more was. to
be achieved—Varuna, in order to provide for
his recreation, said to his wife Varuni (the
goddess of wine). You. Madira, are ever
acceptable to the powerful Ananta; go
therefore, auspicious and kind goddess, and
promote his enjoyments." Obeying these
commands, Varuni went and established her-
self in the hollow of a Kadamba tree in the
woods of Vrndavana, Baladeva, roaming
about, came there, and smelling the pleasant
fragrance of liquor, resumed his ancient
passion for strong drink. The holder of the
ploughshare observing the vinous drops
distilling from the Kadamba tree, was much
delighted, and gathered and quaffed them?
along with the herdsmen and the Gopis, whilst
those who were skilful with voice and lute
celebrated him in their songs. Being inebriated
with the wine, and the drops of perspiration
standing like pearls upon his limbs, he called
out, not knowing what he said, "Come hither,
Yamuna river, I want to bathe." The river,
disregarding the words to a drunken man,
came not at his bidding: on which Rama in a

rage took up his ploughshare, which he
plunged into her bank, and dragged her to him,
calling out, “Will you not come, You jade?
Will you not come? Now go where you please
(if you can).” Thus saying, he compelled the
dark river to quit its ordinary course, and
follow him whithersoever he wandered
through the wood.

शरीरिणीं तथोत्पत्य त्रासविह्वललोचना।

प्रसीदेत्यब्रवीद रामं मुञ्च At मुषलायुध।। १२॥

सोऽद्रवीदवजानासि मम शौर्यबले यदि।

सोऽहं त्वां हलपातेन विनेष्यामि सहस्रधा।॥१३॥

Assuming a mortal figure, the Yamuna.
with distracted looks, approached Balabhadra,
and entreated him to pardon her, and let her
go: but he replied, “TI will drag you with my
ploughshare in a thousand directions, since
you contemn my prowess and strength.”

पराशर उवाच

इत्युक्तयातिसन्त्रासात् तया नद्या प्रसादित:।

भूभागे प्लाविते तस्मिन् मुमोच यमुनां बल:।॥ १४॥
तत: स्नातस्य वै कान्तिराजगाम महात्मन:।
अवतंसोत्पलं UTE गृहीत्वैकञ्च कुण्डलम्॥ १५॥
वरुणप्रहितां चास्मै मालासम्लानपङ्कृजाम्।

समुद्राभे तथा वस्त्रे नीले लक्ष्मीरयच्छत्।। १६॥
कृतावंस: स तदा चारुकुण्डलभूषित:। .
नीलाम्बरधर: wat शुशुभे कान्तिसंयुत:॥ १७॥

At last, however, appeased by her reiterated
prayers, he let her go after she had watered all
the country.’ When he had bathed, the goddess
of beauty Laksmi, came and gave him a
beautiful lotus to place in one car, and an
earring for the other; a fresh necklace of lotus
flowers, sent byVaruna; and garments of a
dark blue colour, as costly as the wealth of the
ocean; and thus decorated with a lotus in one
ear, a ring in the other, dressed in blue
garments, and wearing a garland, Balarama
appeared united with loveliness.

set विभूषितो रेमे तत्र रामस्तथा व्रजे।
भासद्दयेन यातश्च पुन: स द्वारकां पुरीम्।। १८॥
