BOOK I, CHAP. 13

प्रजार्थमृषयस्तस्य ममन्धुर्दक्षिणं करम्।
वेणस्य पाणौ मथिते सम्बभूव महामुने।। <I
वैण्यो are महीपालो a: yy: परिकीर्तित:।
येन दुग्धा मही ys प्रजानां हितकारणात्॥९॥

Parasara continued— The sons of Dhruva,
by his wife Sambhu, were Bhavya and Slisti.
Succhaya, the wife of the latter, was the
mother of five virtuous sons, Ripu, Ripnnjaya,
Vipra, Vrkala, and Vrkatejas. The son of Ripu,
by Vrhati. was the illustrious Caksusa, who
begot the Manu Caksusa on Puskarini, of the
family of Varuna, the daughter of the
venerable patriarch Anaranya. The Manu had,
by his wife Navala, the daughter of the
patriarch Vairaja. ten noble sons, Uru. Puru.
Satadyumna, Tapasvi, Satyavak, Kavi. Agnist
oma, Atiracra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu.
'You wife of Uru, Agneyi, bore six excellent
sons, Anga, Sumanas, Swati, Kratu. Angiras,
and Siva. Anga had, by his wife Sunitha, only
one son, named Vena, whose right arm was
rubbed by the Rsis, for the purpose of pro-
ducing from it progeny. From the arm of
Vena, thus rubbed, sprang a_ celebrated
monarch, named Prthu, by whom, in olden
time, the earth was milked for the advantage
of mankind’.

मैत्रेय उवाच
किमर्थं मधित: पाणिर्वेणस्य परमर्षिभि:।
यत्र यज्ञे महावीर्य: स पृथुर्मुनिसत्तम:॥ १०॥
Maitreya.—Best of Munis, tell me why was
the right hand of Vena rubbed by the holy

sages, in consequence of which the heroic
Prthu was produced.

पराशर sara
सुनीथा नाम या कन्या मृत्यो: प्रथमतोऽभवत्।
अङ्गस्य भार्या सा दत्ता तस्यां वेणो व्यजायत॥ ११॥
स मातामहदोषेण तेन मृत्यो: सुतात्मज:।
निसर्गादेव मैत्रेय दुष्ट एवं व्यजायत।। १२॥
अभिषिक्तो यदा राज्ये स वेण: परमर्षिभि:।
च्चोषयामास स तदा पृथिव्यां पृथिवीपति:।। १३॥

81

न यष्टव्यं न होतव्यं न दातव्यं कदाचन।

भोक्ता यज्ञस्य कस्त्वन्यो ह्यहं यज्ञपति: प्रभु:।। १४॥
ततस्तमृषय: ya सम्पूज्य जगतीपतिम्।

ऊचु: सामकलं wag मैन्रेय समुपस्थिता:॥ १५॥

Parasara said— Sunitha was originally the
daughter of Mrtyu, by whom she was given to
Anga to wife. She bore him Vena, who
inherited the evil propensities of his matcrnal
grandfather. Whcn he was inaugurated by the
Rsis monarch of the earth, he caused it to be
every where proclaimed, that no worship
should be performed, no oblations offered, no
gifts bestowed upon the Brahmanas. “TI, the
king,” said he, " am the lord of sacrificc; for
who but I am entitled to the oblations.” The Rs
is, respectfully approaching the sovereign,
addressed him in melodious accents, and said,
ॠषय ऊचु:

भो भो राजन् शृणुष्व त्वं Te वदामस्तव प्रभो।
राज्यदेहोपकाराय प्रजानाञ्च fed परम्।। १६॥
दीर्घसत्रेण देवेशं सर्वयज्ञेश्वरं हरिम्।

पूजयिष्याम भद्रं ते तस्यांशस्ते भविष्यति॥ go
यज्ञेन यज्ञपुरुषो हरि: सम्प्रीणितो नृप।
अस्माभिर्भवत: कामान् सर्वानेव प्रदास्यति।। १८॥
यज्ञैर्यज्ञेश्वरो येषां WS सम्पूज्यते हरि:;।

तेषां सर्वेप्सितावाप्तिं ददाति नृप भूभृताम्।। १९॥

Rsis replied~ “Gracious prince, we salute
you; hear what we have to reprcsent. For the
preservation of your kingdom and your life,
and for the benefit of all your subjects, permit
us to worship Hari, the lord of all sacrifice, the
god of gods, with solemn and protracted rites”;
a portion of the fruit of which will revert to
you’. Visnu, the god of oblations, being
propitiated with sacrifice by us, will grant you,
oh king, all your desires. Those princes have
alf their wishes gratified, in whose realms
Hari, the lord of sacrifice, is adored with
sacrificial rites.”

वेण उवाच
Tt: कोऽभ्यधिकोऽन्योऽस्ति यश्चाराध्यो ममापर:।
