BOOK IV, 15

अनन्तरञ्ज ad winged भगवत् प्रहिता योगनिद्रा
रोहिण्या जठरमपकृष्य नीतवती॥ १४॥ ।

कर्षणाच्चासावपि सङ्कर्षणाख्यमवाप।॥ १५॥

तत: सकलजगन्मरातरुमूलभूतो भूतातीतभविष्यदादि-
रनलप्रमुखैश्च प्रणम्यावनि-भारावतारणाय प्रसादितो
भगवाननादिमध्यो देवकीगर्भे समवततार वासुदेव:।। १६॥

तत्प्रसादविवरद्धितमानाभिमाना च योगनिद्रा नन्दगोपपत्न्या
यशोदाया दर्भमधिष्ठितवती॥ १७॥

When Devaki was pregnant the seventh
time, Yoganidra (the sleep of devotion), sent
by Visnu, extricated the embryo from its
maternal womb at midnight and transferred it
to that of Rohini; and from having been thus
taken away, the child (who was Balarama)
received the name of Sankarsana. Next, the
divine Visnu himself, the root of the vast
universal tree, inscrutable by फा९
understandings of all gods, demons, sages and
men, past, present or to come, adored by
Brahma and all the deities, he who is without
beginning, middle or end, being moved to
relieve the earth of her load, descended into
the womb of Devaki and was born as her son
Vasudeva. Yoganidra, proud to execute his
orders, removed the embryo to Yasod4, the
wife of Nanda the cowherd.

fi दि दिभयं —
मेवैतज्जगदपास्ताधर्ममभवत् तस्मिंश्च पुण्डरीकनयने
जायमाने।। १८॥

At his birth the earth was relieved from all
iniquity; the sun, moon and planets shone with
unclouded splendour; all fear of calamitous
portents was dispelled; and universal
happiness prevailed.

जातेन च तेनाखिलमेवैतत् सन्मार्गवर्ति जगद्क्रियत।
भगवतोऽथ्यत्र मर्त्यलोकेऽवतीर्णस्य षोडशसहस्रण्येकोत्तर-
शताधिकानि स्त्रीणामभवन्। तासाञ्च रुक्मिणीसत्यभामा-
जाष्ववतीजालहासिनींप्रप्रुखाअष्टौपत्न्य प्नघाना।तासु

373

तेषाञ्च प्रद्युम्न-चारुदेष्ण-साम्बादयस्त्रयोदश प्रथाना:।
प्रद्युम्नो हि रुक्मिणस्तनयां ककुद्वतीं नामोपयेमे।
तस्यामस्यानिरुद्धो WH अनिरुद्धोऽपि रुक्मिण wa whit
सुभद्रां नामेपयेमे। तस्यामस्य वज्रोऽभवत्। वज्रस्य प्रतिबाहु:
तस्यापि सुचारु:।

From the moment he appeared, all mankind
were led into the righteous path in him. While
this powerful being resided in this world of
mortals, he had sixteen thousand and one
hundred wives; of these the principal were
Rukmint, Satyabhama, Jambavantt, Jatahasini
and four others. By these the universal form,
who is without beginning, begot a hundred and
eighty thousand sons, of whom thirteen are
most renowned, Pradyumna, Carudesna,
Samba and others. Pradyumna married
Kakudvati, the daughter of Rukmin and had by
her Aniruddha. Aniruddha married Subhadra,
the grand-daughter of the same Rukmin and
she bore him a son named Vajra. The son of
Vajra was Bahu; and his son was Sucér?

एवमनेकशतसाहस्रपुरुषसङ्घस्य यदुकुलस्य पुरुषसंख्या
वर्षशतैरपि ज्ञातुं न wed यतो fe श्लोकावत्र
ARATE २०॥

तिस्र: कोट्य: सहस्राणामष्टाशीतिशतानि च।

कुमाराणां गृहाचार्याश्चापयोग्यासु ये रता:। २१॥सङ्घ्यानं
यादवानां क: करिष्यति महात्मनाम्।

यत्रायुतानामयुतं लक्षेणास्ते शताधिकम्।। 2 २॥

देवासुरहता ये तु दैतेया: सुमहाबला:.

ते चोत्पन्ना मनुष्येषु जनोपद्रवकारिण:॥ २३॥

तेषामुत्सादनार्थाय भुवि देवो यदो: कुले।

अवतीर्ण: कुलशतं यत्रैकाभ्यधिकं द्विज।। २४॥

विष्णुस्तेषां प्रमाणे च प्रभुत्वे च व्यवस्थित:।

निदेशस्थायिनस्तस्य बभूवु: सर्वयादवा:।। २५॥

In this manner the descendants of Yadu
multiplied and there were many hundreds of
thousands of them, so that it would be
impossible to repeat their names in hundreds
of years. Two verses relating to them are

current; the domestic instructors of the boys in
the use of arms amounted to three crores and
