146

THE VISNU-PURANAM

रसेन तेषां प्रख्याता तत्र जम्ब्नदीति वै।। २०॥

सरित् wart सा च पीयते तन्निवासिभि:।

न स्वेदो न च ahha न जरा नेन्द्रियक्षय:॥ २१॥

तत्पानात् स्वच्छमनसां SAAT AT जायते।

तीरमृत् तद्रसं प्राप्य सुखवायुविशोषिता।

जाम्बूनदाख्यं भवति सुवर्णं सिद्धभूषणम्।। २२॥

The boundary mountains (of the earth) are

Himavan, Hemakita, and Nisadha. which lie
south of Meru; and Nila. Sveta, and Srigi,
which are situated to the north of it. The two
central ranges (those next to Meru, or Nisadha
and -Nila) extend for a hundred thousand
(Yojanas, running east and west). Each of the
others diminishes ten thousand Yojanas, as it
lies more remote from the centre. They are
two thousand Yojanas in height, and as many
in breadth.’ The Varsas or countries between
these ranges are Bharata (India), south of the
Himavan mountains; next Kimpurusa, between
Himavan and Hemakita; north of the latter,
and south of Nisadha, is Harivarsa; north of
Meru is Ramyaka, extending from the Nila or
blue mountains to the Sveta (or white)
mountains; Hiranmaya ties between the Sveta
and Srigi ranges; and Uttarakuru is beyond the
latter, following the same direction as
Bharata.* Each of these is nine thousand
Yojanas in extent. [lavrta is of similar
dimensions, but in the centre of it is the golden
mountain Meru, and the country extends nine
thousand Yojanas in each direction from the
four sides of the mountain.” There are four
mountains in this Varsa, formed as buttresses
to Meru. each ten thousand Yojanas in
elevation : that on the east is called Mandara;
that on the south, Gandham4adana; that on the
west, Vipula; and that on the north, Suparsva:°
on each of these stands severally a Kadamba-
tree, a Jambu-tree, a Pipal, and a Vata;” each
spreading over eleven hundred Yojanas, and
towering aloft like banners on the mountain.
From the Jambu-tree the insular continent
Jambu-Dvipa derives its appellations. The
apples of that tree are as large as elephants:

_ when they are rotten, they fait upon the crest

of the mountain, and from their expressed
juice is formed the Jambu river, the waters of
which are drunk by the inhabitants; ‘and in
consequence of drinking of that stream, they
pass their days in content and health, being
subject neither to perspiration, to foul odours,
to decrepitude, nor organic decay. The soil on
the banks of the river, absorbing the Jambu
juice, and being dried by gentle breezes,
becomes the gold termed Jambu-nada, of
which the ornaments of the Siddhas are
fabricated.

भद्राश्वं पूर्वतो मेरो: केतुमालञ्च पश्चिमे।

वर्षे द्वे तु मुनिश्रेष्ठ! तयोर्मध्ये इलाव्रृतम्।। २३॥
ad चैत्ररथं पूर्वे दक्षिणे गन्धमादनम्।

Sunt पक्षिमे तद्वदुत्तरे नन्दनं TT २४॥
अरुणोदं महाभद्रमसितोदं समानसम्।
सरांस्येतानि चत्वारि देवभोग्यानि सर्वदा।। २५॥

The country of Bhadrasva lies on the east
of Meru, and Ketumala on the west; and
between these two is the region of [lavrta, On
the east of the same is the forest Caitraratha;
the Gandhamadana wood is on the south; the
forest of Vaibhraja is on the west; and the
grove of Indra, or Nandana, is on the north.
There are also four great lakes, the waters of
which are partaken of by the gods, called
Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Sitoda, and Manasa.®

शीतान्तश्चक्रमुञ्जश्च कुररी माल्यवांस्तथा।
त्रिकूट: शिशिरश्चैव पतङ्गो रुचकस्तथा॥ २६॥
निषधाया दक्षिणतस्तस्य केसरपर्वता:।
शिखिवासा: सवैदूर्य: कपिलो गन्धमादन:।
जारुधिप्रमुखास्तद्दत् पश्चिमे केसराचला:॥ २७॥
मेरोरनन्तराड्गेषु जठरादिष्ववस्थिता:।
शङ्खकूटोऽथ BAAN हंसो नागस्तथापर:।
कालञ्जराद्याश्च तथा SAL केशराचला:।॥ २ ८॥

The principal mountain ridges which

project from the base of Meru, like filaments
from the root of the lotus, are, on the east,
