BOOK IV, 8

three lines of the above extract; then comes the
story of Banarasa being deserted; we then have the
two next lines; then follow, हैहयस्य तु दायाह्यं हृतवान् स
महीपति:। आजह्रे पितृदयाह्यं दिवोदास ed बलात्। भद्रश्रेण्यस्य पुत्रेण
दुर्द्दमेन महात्मना। वैरस्यान्तं महाराज क्षत्रियेण विधित्सता॥ ‘The
prince (Durddama) invading his patrimonial
possessions, the territory which Divodasa had
seized by force was recovered by the gallant son of
Bhadrasrenya, Durddama, a warrior desirous,
mighty king, to effect the destruction of his foes.’
Here the victory is ascribed to Durddama, in
opposition to what appears to be the sense of the
Vayu and what is undoubtedly that of our text,
which says that he was called Pratarddana from
destroying the race of Bhadragrenya and Satrujit
from vanquishing all his foes : तत: प्रतर्हनो
भद्र ऽनेन .जिता इति शत्रु जिदभवत्। By
Variasya anta, ‘the end of hostility or enmity’, is
obviously not to be understood here, as M.
Langlois has intimated, a friendly pacification, but
the end or destruction of all enemies. In the 32"
chapter of the Hari Varhsa we have precisely the
same lines, slightly varied as to their order; but they
are preceded by this verse; भद्रश्रेण्यस्य पूर्व्वतुं पुरीं वाराणसी
भवात् यदुवंश प्रमूतस्य तपस्थभिरतस्य a ‘The city (that on
the Gomati), before the existence of Bandrasa, of
Bhadrasrenya, a pious of the Yadu race.’ This verse
is not in the Brahma Purana. After giving the rest of
the above quotation, except the last line, the
passage proceeds, अष्टारथो नाम नृप: Yat भीमरथस्य वै। तेन
पुत्रेषु wey yet तस्य भारत। वैरस्यान्तं महारात्त क्षत्रियेण
विधिंत्सता। 'The king called Astaratha was the son of
Bhimaratha; and by him, great king, a warrior
desirous of destroying his foes was (the country)
recovered, the children (of Durddama) being
infants.’ तस्य दुर्द्दमस्य पुत्रेष्वसमर्थेषु। Com. According to
the same authority, we are here to understand
Bhimaratha and Astaratha as epithets of
Divodasa and Pratarddana. From these scanty and
ill-digested notices it appears, that Divodisa, on
being expelled from Bandrasa, took some city and
district on the Gomati from the family of
Bhadrasrenya; that Durddama recovered the
country and that Pratarddana again conquered it
from his descendants. The alternation concerned
apparently only bordering districts, for the princes
of M&ahisamati and of K4si continue, in both an
earlier and a later series, in undisturbed possession
of their capitals and their power.

347

13. The Vayu, Agni, Brahma Purana and Hari
Varhga interpose two sons of Pratarddana, Garga or
Bharga and Vatsa; and they make Vatsa the father
of Alarka, except the Brahma, which has Satrujit
and Rtadhvaja as two princes following Vatsa.

14. The Vayu, Brahma and Hari Varhsa repeat
this stanza and add thaf Alarka enjoyed such
protracted existence through the favour of
Lopamudra and that having lived till the period at
which the curse upon Kasi terminated, he killed the
Raksasas Ksemaka, by whom it had been occupied
after it was abandoned by Divodasa and caused the
city to be reinhabited, शापस्यान्ते महावाहुर्हत्वा क्षेमकराक्षसं
val वासयामास पुरीं वाराणसीं पुन:। The Hari Varhsa agrees
as usual with the Brahma, except in the reading of
one or two names. It is to be observed, however,
that the Agni makes the Kasi princes the
descendants of Vitatha, the successor of Bharata.
The Brahma Purana and Hari Varnga, determined
apparently to be right, give the list twice over,
deriving it in one place from Ksatravrddha, as in
our text, the Vayu and the Bhagavata; and in
another, with the Agni, from Vitatha. The series of
the Brahma, however, stops with Lauhi, the son of
Alarka and does not warrant the repetition which
the carelessness of the compiler of the Hari Varhsa
has superfluously inserted.

15. Several varieties occur, in the series that
follows, as the comparative lists will best show :

Bhagavata Brahma Vayu Agni
Alarka Alarka Alarka Alarka
Santati Sannati Sannati Dharmaketu
Sunitha Sunitha Sunitha Vibhu
Suketana Ksema Suketu Sukumara
Dharmaketu Ketumat Dhrstaketu. Satyaketu
Satyaketu Suketu Venuhotra
Dhrstaketu Dharmaketu Gargya
Sukumara Satyaketu Gargabhimi
Vitihotra Vibhu Vatsabhimi
Bharga Anartta
Bhargabhimi Sukumara

Dhrstaketu

Venuhotri

Bharga

Vatsabhiimi

16. Our text is clear enough and so is the
Bhagavata, but the Vayu, Brahma and Hari Varnsa
contain additions of rather doubtful import. The
former has, वेणुहोत्र मुतश्चापि wat वै नामविश्रुत: गार्ग्यस्य
