154

THE VISNU-PURANAM

borders of the sea, and no doubt intends India
proper. Wilford places here a division called
Kumiarika. No description is anywhere attempted of
the other divisions. To these the Vayu adds six
minor Dvipas, which are situated beyond sea and
are islands, Anga-dvipa. Yama- dvipa, Matsya-
dvipa, Kumuda or Kuga dvipa, Varaha- dvipa, and
Sankha- dvipa; peopled for the most part by
Mlechchhas, but who worship Hindu divinities. The
Bhagavata and Padma name eight such islands.
Swaraprastha. Candragukla. Avarttana. Ramanaka.
Mandahfra. Paficajaya. Sinhala, and Lanka Wilford
has endeavoured to verify the first series of
Upadvipas, making Varaha Europe; Kuga, Asia
Minor, etc., Sankha, Africa; Malaya, Mleccha:
Yama is undetermined; and by Anga, he says, they
understand China. How all this may be is more than
doubtful, for in the three Puranas in which mention
is made of them, very little more is said upon the
subject.

4. By Kiratas, foresters and mountaineers are
intended, the inhabitants to the present day of the
mountains east of Hindustan. The Yavanas, on the
west, may be either the Greeks of Bactria and the
Punjab— to whom there can be tittle doubt the term
was applied by the Hindus— or the Mohammedans,
who succeeded them in a later period, and to whom
it is now applied. The Vayu calls them both
Miechchhas, and also notices the admixture of
barbarians with Hindus in India proper: तैर्विमिश्रा
जनपदा anal म्लेच्छाश्च नित्यश:। The same passage,
slightly varied occurs in the Mahabhdrata: it is said
especiaily of the mountainous districts, and may
allude therefore to the Gonds and Bhils of central
India, as well as to the Mohammedans of the north
west. The specification implies that infidels and
outcastes had not yet descended on the plains of
Hindustan.

5. This is a very meagre list, compared with
those given in other Puranas. That of the Vayu is
translated by Wilford, As. Res. vol. VIII: and much
curious illustration of many of the places by the
same writer occurs. As. Res. vol. XIV. The lists of
the Mahabharara, Bhagavata and Padma are given
without any arrangement: those of the Vayu,
Matsya, Markandeya, and Kiirma are classed as in
the text. Their lists are too long for insertion in this
place. Of the rivers named in the text, most are
capable of verification. The Satadru, 'the hundred

channelled’ the Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesidrus of
Pliny—is the Satlej. The Candrabhaga, Sandabalis.
or Acesnes, is the Chinab. The Vedasmrti in the
Vayu and Kiirma is classed with the Vetravati or
Betwa, the Carmanvati or Chambal and Sipra and
Para, rivers of Malwa. and may be the same with
the Beos of the maps. The Narmada or Narbadda,
the Namadus of Ptolemy, is well known; according
to the Vayu it rises, not in the Vindhya, but in the
Rksa mountains, taking its origin in fact in
Gondwana. The Suraga is uncertain. The Tapi is the
Tapti rising also in Gondwana: the other two are
not identified. The Godavari preserves its name: in
the other two we have the Beemah and the Krsna.
For Krtamala the Karma reads RtumAla, but neither
is verified. The Tamraparni is in Tinivelly, and
rises at the southern extremity of the western Ghats.
The Risikulya, that rises in the Mahendra mountain,
is the Rasikulia or Rasikoila. which flows into the
sea near Ganjam. The Trisima is undetermined.
The text assigns another Risikulya to the
Suktimat mountains, but in all the other authorities
the word is Rishika. The Kumari might suggest
some connexion with Cape Comorin, but that the
Malaya mountains seem to extend to the extreme
south. A Rishikuly4 river is mentioned (Vana P. v.
3026) as a Tirtha in the Mahabharata. in connexion
apparently with the hermitage of Vasistha, which in
another passage (v. 4096) is said to be on mount
Arbuda or Abu. In that case, and if the reading of
the text be admitted for the name of the river, the
Suktimat range would be the mountains of Guzerat;
but this is doubtful.

6. The list of nations is as scanty as that of the
rivers: it is, however, omitted altogether in the
Bhagavata. The Padma has a long catalogue, but
without arrangement; so has the Mahabharata. The
lists of the Vayu, Matsya, and Markandeya class
the nations as central northern, eastern, southern,
and western. The names are much the same in ali
and are given in the 8"" vol. of the As. Res. from the
Brahmanda. or, for it is the same account, the
Vayu. The Markandeya has a second classification,
and, comparing Bharata-varsa to a tortoise, with its
head to the east, enumerates the countries in the
head, tail, flanks, and feet of the animal. It will be
sufficient here to attempt an identification of the
names in text, but some further illustration is
offered at the end of the chapter. The Kurus are the
