THE VISNU-PURANAM

388
CHAPTER 21
एकोविंशोऽध्याय:

(भाविनृपतीनां विवरणम्)
पराशर उवाच

अत: परं भविष्यानहं भूमिपालान् कीर्त्तयिष्ये। ast
साम्प्रतमवनीपति:, तस्यापि जनमेजयश्रुतसेनोग्रसेन-
भीमसेना: पुत्राश्चत्वारो भविष्यन्ति।। gn

तस्यापर: शतानीको भविष्यति। योऽसौ याज्ञवल्क्याद्
aera कृपादस्त्राण्यवाप्य विषयविरक्तव्रतिश्च
जशौनकोपदेशात्मविज्ञानप्रवण: परं निर्वाणमवाप्स्यति॥ २॥

शतानीकादश्वमेधदत्तो भविता, तस्मादप्याधिसीमकृष्ण:
अधिसीमकृष्णाद् निचक्षि:) यो गडङ्गयापहृते हस्तिनापुरे
कौशाम्ब्यां निवत्स्यति। तस्याप्युष्ण: पित्रो भविता।
सुषेण:, तस्मादपि सुनीथ:, सुनीथाद्दच:, a नृचक्षु:)
तस्यापि सुखाबल:, तस्मात् परिप्लव:, ततश्च सुनय:, At
मेधावी, मेधाविनो नृपञ्जय:, ततो ge: तस्मात् firm,
तिग्माद् बृहद्रय:), तस्माद् वसुदान:, ततोऽप्यपर:
शतानीक:॥३॥

ब्रह्मक्षत्रस्य यो योनिर्वशो राजर्षिसत्कृत:।

क्षेमकं प्राप्य राजानं स संस्थां प्राप्स्यते कलौ।।४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे एकविंश: अध्याय:।।

I will now enumerate the kings who will
reign in future periods.' The present monarch,
Pariksit,” will have four sons, Janamejaya,

Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena.’ The son
of Janamejaya will be Satanika,’ who will
study the Vedas under Yajfiyavalkya and
military science with Krpa; but becoming
dissatisfied with sensual enjoyments, he will
acquire spiritual knowledge from the
instructions of Saunaka and ultimately obtain
salvation. His son will be ASvamedhadatta (a
son given by the gods in reward for the
sacrifice of a horse); his son will be Asima-
Krsna;° his son will be Nicakra,’ who will
remove the capital to Kausambi, in
consequence of Hastinapura being washed
away by the Ganges; his son will be Usna;* his
son will be Citraratha; his son will be Vrs
nimat;’ his son will be Sunitha;!° his son will
be Rica;'' his son will be Nrcaksu;!” his son
will be Sukhibala;"? his son will be Pariplava;
his son will be Sunaya;'* his son will be
Medhavin; his son will be Nrpafijaya;’* his son
will be Mrdu;'® his son will be Tigma;'’ his
son will be Vrhadratha; his son will be
Vasudana;'* and his son will be another
Satinika; his son will be Udayana;”” his son
will be Ahinara;?? his son will be
Khandapani;”! his son will be Niramitra;”” his
son will be Ksemaka;” of him this verse is
recited; “The race which gave origin to
Brahmanas and Ksatriyas and which was
purified by regal sages, terminated with Ks
emaka in the Kali age.”*"

NOTES

1. The style now adopted is that of prophecy, as
Vyasa could not consistently have recorded the
events which were posterior to his time.

2. Also read Pariksita, Pariksa and Pariksi.

3. See Bk. IV. Ch. XX. The Vayu and Matsya
relate, rather obscurely, a dispute between
Janamejaya and Vaisampayana, in consequence of
the former's patronage of the Brahmanas of the
Vajasaneyi branch of the Yajurveda, in opposition
to the latter, who was the author of the black or
original Yajus (see Bk. III. Ch. V). Janamejaya
twice performed the ASvamedha according to the
Vajasaneyi ritual and established the Trisarvi or use
