BOOK ITI, CHAP. 14

CHAPTER 14
चतुर्दशोऽध्याय:

(श्राद्धफलश्रुति-विशेषश्राद्धफल-पितृगीतावर्णनम्)
और्व sare

विश्लेदेवान् पितृगणान् वयांसि मनुजान् TE १॥।
सरीसृपानृषिगणान् यचान्नद्भूतसंज्ञितम्।
श्राद्धं श्रद्धान्वित: कुर्वन् प्रीणयत्यखिलं जगत्।। २॥
मासि मास्यसिते पक्षे पञ्चदश्यां नरेश्वर।
तथाष्टकासु Halt काम्यान् कालाञ्छृणुष्व मे॥३॥

Aurva _ proceeded—"Let the devout
performer of an ancestral oblation’ propitiate
Brahmi, Indra, Rudra, the Agvini, the sun, fire,
the Vasus, the winds, the Visvadevas, the
sages, birds, men, animals, reptiles,
progenitors and all existent things, by offering
adoration to them monthly, on the fifteenth
day of the rioon's wane (or dark fortnight) or
on the eighth day of the same period in certain
months or at particular seasons, as I will
explain.

श्राद्धं कुर्वीत विज्ञाय व्यतीपातेऽयने तथा।।४॥
विषुवे चापि are ग्रहणे शशि-सूर्ययो:।
समस्तेष्वेव भूपाल! राशिष्वर्के च गच्छति॥ ५॥
नक्षत्रग्रहषीडासु दुष्टस्वप्नावलोकने।
इच्छाश्राद्धानि कुर्वीत नवशस्यागमे तथा।। ६॥
आमावास्या यदा मैत्रविशाखास्वातियोगिनी।
श्राद्धै: पितृगणस्तृप्तिं तथाप्नोत्यष्टवार्षिकीम्॥ ७॥
STATA यदा पुष्ये रौद्रे wal पुनर्वसौ।
द्वादशाब्दं तदा तृप्तिं प्रयान्ति पितरोऽचिता:॥ ८॥।

"When a householder finds that any
circumstance has occurred or a distinguished
guest has arrived, on which account ancestral
ceremonies are appropriate, he should
celebrate them. He should offer a voiuntary
sacrifice upon any atmospheric portent, at the
equinoctial and solstical periods, at eclipses of
the sun and moon, on the sun's entrance into a

275

zodiacal sign, upon unpropitious aspects. of the
planets and asterisms, on dreaming unlucky
dreams and on eating the grain of the year's
harvest. The Pitrs derive satisfaction. for eight
years from ancestral offerings upon the day of
new moon when the star of the conjunction’ is
Anuradha, Visékhad or Svati; and for twelve
years when it is Pusya, Ardra or Punarvasu.
वासवाजैकपादर्क्ष पितॄणां तृप्तिमिच्छताम्।
arent चाप्यमावास्या देवानामपि दुर्लभा।।९॥
नवस्वृक्षेष्वमावास्या यदैतेष्ववनीपते।
तदा तृप्तिप्रदं srg पितॄणां शृणु चापरम्।। १०॥
गीतं सनत्कुमारेण यथैलाय महात्मने।
पृच्छते पितृभक्ताय प्रश्रयावनताय a ११॥
सनत्कुमार उवाच
वैशाखमासस्य च या तृतीया
नवम्यसौ कार्तिकशुक्लपक्षे।
नभस्यमासस्य च कृष्णपक्षे
TAHA पञ्चदशी च माघे।। १२॥
रनन्तपुण्यास्तिथयश्चतस्र:।
उपप्लवे चन्द्रमसो रवेश्च
त्रिष्वष्टकास्वप्ययनद्वये A १३॥
पानीयमप्यत्र तिलैर्विमिश्रं
दद्यात् पितृभ्य: प्रयतो मनुष्य:।
Tg कृतं तेन Wa: Wea
NA Frere aati १४॥ .

It is not easy for a man to effect his object,
who is desirous of worshipping the Pitrs or the
gods on a day of new moon when the stars are
those of Dhanistha. Pirvabhadrapada or Sata-
bhisa. Hear also an account of another class of
Sraddhas, which afford especial contentment
to progenitors, as explained by Sanatkumara,
the son of Brahma, to the magnanimous
Purtiravas, when full of faith and devotion to
the Pitrs he inquired how he might please
them. The third lunar day of the month
Vaisaékha (April, May) and the ninth of
K4rtika (October, November), in the light
