322

CHAPTER 4

चतुर्थोऽध्याय:
(सागरस्याश्वमेधयज्ञ: भगीरथस्य गङ्गानयनम्
रामचन्द्रादजीनामुत्पत्तिश्च)

Wet उवाचं

कश्यपदुहिता सुमतिविदर्भराजतनया च केशिनी द्वे भार्य्य
सगरस्यास्ताम्॥ १॥

ताभ्याञ्चापत्यार्थमाराधित sited: परमेण समाधिना
वरमदात्॥ २॥

जनयिष्यतीति, यस्या तदभिमतं गृह्यताम्। इत्युक्ते केशिनी
ten, सुमति: पुत्रसहस्राणि we ag तथेति च
पुत्रमसूत केशिनी। विनतातनयायास्तु «que: ut:
पुत्रसहस्राण्यभवन्। तस्मादसमञ्जसोऽंशुमान् ATT कुमारो
जज्ञे॥। ३॥

Sumati the daughter of KaSyapa and Kesini
the daughter of Raja Vidarbha, were the two
wives of Sagara.’ Being without progeny, the
king solicited the aid of the sage Aurva with

THE VISNU-PURANAM

great earnestness and the Muni pronounced
this boon, that one wife should bear one son,
the upholder of his race and the other should
give birth to sixty thousand sons; and he left it
to them to make their election. Kesini chose to
have the single son; Sumati the multitude : and
it came to pass in a short time the former bore
Asamanjas,” a prince through whom the
dynasty continued and the daughter of Vinara
(Sumati) had sixty thousand sons. The son of
Asamanjas was Ansumat.

अथ तत्रापि वयस्यतीते तच्चरितमेवैनं पिता तत्याज।।४॥
मनुचक्रु:।।५॥

तदर्थमूचु:।। ६॥

भग्वन्। एभि: सगरतनयेरसमञ्जसश्चरितमनुगम्यते,
कथमेवेभिरनुसरद्भिर्जगद्भविष्यतीत्यार्त्तजगत्परित्राणाय च
भगवतोऽत्र शरीरग्रहणम्। इत्याकर्ण्य भगवान् `अल्पैरेव
fetta विनङ्कयन्ति` इत्युक्तवान्॥७॥

Asamanjas was from his boyhood of very
irregular conduct. His father hoped that as he
grew up to manhood he would reform; but
finding that he continued guilty of the same
immorality, Sagara abandoned him. The sixty
thousand sons of Sagara followed the example
of their brother Asamanjas. The path of virtue
and piety being obstructed in the world by the
sons of Sagara, the gods repaired to the Muni
Kalpa, who was a portion of Visnu, free from
fault and endowed with all true wisdom.
Having approached him with respect, they
said, "O lord, what will become of the world,
if these sons of Sagara are permitted to go on
in the evil ways which they have learned from
Asamanjas! Do you, then, assume a visible
form, for the protection of the afflicted
universé.” "Be satisfied," replied the sage, "in
a brief time the sons of Sagara shall be all
destroyed.”
