BOOK II, CHAP. 3

163

56. Also read Bahikas; which we may here
prefer, as the Bahlikas are subsequently named ; the
former are described in the Mahabharata, Karna
Parva, with some detail, and comprehend the
different nations of the Punjab, from the Sutlej to
the Indus.

57. These are Included amongst the northern
nations; Vayu. ctc.; but in Nakula's Dig-vijaya they
are in the west.

58. The Abhiras, according to the Puranas, are
also in the north : in the Ramayana and Mahabharat
Sabha P. they are in the west. The fact seems to be,
that the people along the Indus, from Surat, to the
Himalaya, are often regarded as either western or
northern nations, according to the topographical
position of the writer : in either case the same tribes
are intended.

59. The MSS. read Kalatayakas. a people placed
by the Puranas in the north.

60. The Vayu reads Aparitas, a northern nation.
There are Aparytae in Herodotus, classed with a
people bordering on India, the Gandari. The term in
the text signifies also "borderers,’’ and is probably
correct, as opposed to the following word Pardntas :
the latter signifying those beyond, and the former,
those not beyond the borders. The latter has for
Parantas, Paritas; and the Matsya, Paradas.

61. Also Pahlavas, a northern or north-western
nation, often mentioned in Hindu writings, in
Manu. the Ramayana, the Puranas, &c. They were
not a Hindu people and may have been some of the
tribes between India and Persia.

62. Also Carmakhandikas, but the sense is the
same : those living in the district Mandala or
Khanda of Charma; they are a northern people :
Vayu, etc. Pliny mentions a king of a people so
called, "Charmarum rex."

63. Read Marubhaumas : more satisfactorily, as
it means the inhabitants of Marubhimi, ‘the desert;'
the sands of Sindh.

64. Also Surdastras, which is no doubt more
correct; the inhabitants of Surat.

65 The Kekayas or Kaikeyas appear amongst the
chief nations in the war of the Mahabharata, their
king being a kinsman of Krsna. The Ramayana, II.
53. specifies their position beyond, or west of. the
Vipasa. ॥

66. We have in the Puranas Kuttapracharanas
and Kuttapravarnas amongst the mountain tribes.

67. These may be people upon the Mahi river :
they are named amongst the southern nations by the
Vayu. etc., but the west is evidently intended.

68. Read also Kachchas : the Puranas have
Kacchiyas. The form is equally applicable to people
dwelling in districts contiguous to water and in
marshy spots, and denotes the province still called
Cutch.

69. Also read Adhya. Antya, and Andhra : the
latter is the name of Telingana, the Andhri of Pliny.

70. Three MSS, have Malada, a people of the
east in Bhima's Dig-vijaya.

71. Also Manavalakas.

72. A people of the east.

73. The western provinces of Bengal, or. as
sometimes used in a more comprehensive sense, it
includes the following districts Rajshahi,
Dinajpur, and Rangpur; Nadiya. Birbhum,
Burdwan, part of Midnapur. and the Jungle Mahals;
Ramgarh. Pachete, Palamow, and part of Chunar.
See an account of Pundra, translated from what is
said to be part of the Brahmanda section of the
Bhavisya Purana. Calcutta Quart. Mag. Dec. 1824.

74. There is considerable variety in this term,
Larga, Marja. Samuttara, and Samantara: probably
neither is correct. Bhargas are amongst the people
subdued in the east by Bhima.

75. These are foresters and barbarians in general.

76. Notwithstanding the celebrity of this country,
as the kingdom of Nala. it does not appear exactly
where it was situated : we may conclude it was not
far from Vidharba (Berar) as that was the country
of Damayanti. From the directions given by Nala to
Damayanti, it is near the Vindhya mountain and
Payoshni river, and roads lead from it across the
Rksa mountain to Avanti and the south, as well as
to Vidarbha and to Kosala. Nalopakhyana, sec. 9.

77. These are always placed in the west : they
are fabled to be the descendants of Anartta, the son
of Saryati, who founded the capital KuSasthali,
afterwards Dvaraka. on the sea-shore in Guzerat.

78. Also Pratimatsyas those opposite or
adjacent to the Matsyas.

79. Also Kusajas and Kosalas; the latter is
probably correct, as the name does not occur in any
other form than that of Kasi-kogalaé above, Kosala
is a name variously applied. Its earlicst and most
celebrated application is to the country on the
banks of the Sarayi, the kingdom of Rama of
