BOOK VI, CHAP. 4

S41

gradually overspreads the whole of the world.
While space is enveloped in flame, above,
below, and all around, the element of wind
seizes upon the rudimental property, or form,
which is the cause of light; and that being
withdrawn, all becomes of the nature of air.

प्रनष्टे रूपतन्मात्रे हृतरूपो विभावसु:। २१॥

प्रशाम्यति तदा ज्योतिर्वायुर्दोधूयते महान्।
निरालोके तदा लोके वाखवस्थे च तेजसि ॥ २९२॥

ततस्तु YATE TY: सम्भवमात्मन:।
ऊर्ध्वञ्चाधश्च तिर्य्यक् च दोधवीति दिशो दश ।। २३॥
प्रशाम्यति ततो arg: Gg तिष्ठत्यनावृतम् ॥ २४॥
अरूपमरसस्पर्शमगन्धं न च मूर्तिमत्।
WANA सुमहत् सम्प्रकाशते ।। २५॥
परिमण्डलं तच्छुषिरमाकाशं शब्दलक्षणम्।
शब्दमात्रं तदाकाशं सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति ॥ २६॥
aa: शब्दं गुणं तस्य भूतादिर्ग्रसते पुन:।

भूतेन्द्रियेषु Brag भूतादौ संस्थितेषु Su २७॥

The rudiment of form being destroyed, and
fire deprived of its rudiment, air extinguishes
fire, and spreads resistlessly over space, which
is deprived of light when fire merges into air.
Air then, accompanied by sound, which is the
source of ether, extends every where
throughout the ten regions of space, until ether
seizes upon contact, its rudimental property;
by the loss of which, air is destroyed, and
ether remains unmodified: devoid of form,
flavour, touch, and smell, it exists unembodied
and vast, and pervades the wholc of spacc,
Ether, whose characteristic property and
rudiment is sound, exists alone, occupying all
the vacuity of space. But then the radical
elements egotism devours sound, and all the
elements and faculties are at once merged into
their original.

अभिमानात्मको ह्येष भूतादिस्तामस: स्मृत:।
भूतादिं ग्रसते चापि महान् वै बुद्धिलक्षण:।॥ २८॥
sat महांश्च जगत: प्रान्तेऽन्तर्बाह्यतस्तथा।। २९॥

एवं सप्त महाबुद्धे! क्रमात् प्रकृतयस्तु वै।
WE तु ता: सर्वा प्रविशन्ति परस्परम्॥ ३०॥

This primary element is consciousness,
combined with the property of darkness, and is
itself swallowed up by Mahat, whose
characteristic property is intelligence; and
earth and Mahat are the inner and outer
boundaries of the universe. In this manner, as
in the creation were the seven forms of nature
(Prakrti), reckoned from Mahat to earth’, so, at
the time of elemental dissolution, these seven
successively re-enter into each other.

येनेदमावृतं सर्वमण्डमप्सु प्रलीयते।

सप्तद्दीपसमुद्रान्तं सप्तलोकं सपर्वतम्।। ३ १॥
उदकावरणं Ay ज्योतिषा पीयते तु तत्।
ज्योतिर्वायौ लयं याति यात्याकाशे समीरण:।। ३ २॥
आकाशञ्चैव भूतादिर्ग्रसते तं Tet महान्।
महान्तमेभि: सहितं प्रकृतिर्ग्रसते fier 331

गुणासाम्यमनुद्रिक्तमन्यूनञ्च महामुने |
प्रोच्यते प्रकृतिर्हेतु प्रधानं कारणं परम्॥ ३४॥

The egg of Brahma is dissolvcd in the
waters that surround it, with its seven zones,
seven oceans, seven regions, and _ their
mountains. The investure of water is drunk up
by fire; the stratum of fire is absorbed by that
of air: air blends itself with ether: the primary
element of egotism devours the ether, and is
itself taken up by intellect, which, along with
all these, is seized upon by nature (Prakrti).
Equilibrium of the three properties, without
excess or deficiency, is called nature Prakrti,
origin (Hetu), the chief principle (Pradhana),
cause (K4rana), supreme (Param).

इत्येषा प्रकृति: सर्वा व्यक्ताव्यक्तस्वरूपिणी।
व्यक्तस्वरूपमव्यक्ते तस्मिन् मैत्रेय! लीयते।। ३५॥
एक: शुद्धोऽक्षरो नित्य: सर्वव्यापी तथा पुमान्।
सोऽप्यंश: सर्वभूतस्य मैत्रेय! परमात्मन:।। ३ ६॥
न सन्ति यत्र सर्वेशे नामजात्यादिकल्पना:।
सत्तामात्रात्मके HA ज्ञानात्मन्यात्मन: उरे।१७॥
स ब्रह्म तत् परं धाम परमात्मा Ts

स विष्णु: सर्वमेवेदं यतो नावर्त्तते यति:॥ ३ ८॥
