३6

THE VISNU-PURANAM

endowed with the quality of goodness; others

pious men, attached to their duties, attentive to

from his breast, pervaded by the quality of prescribed obligations, and walking in the

foulness; others from his thighs, in whom
foulness and darkness prevailed; and others
from his feet, in whom the quality of darkness
predominated. These were, in succession,
beings of the several castes, Brahmanas, Ks
atriyas, Vaisyas, and Sidras, produced from
the mouth, the breast, the thighs, and the feet
of Brahma’.

यज्ञनिष्पत्तये सर्वमेतद् ब्रह्मा चकार वै।

चातुर्वर्ण्य महाभाग यज्ञसाधनमुत्तमम्।७॥

यज्ञैराप्यायिता tar वृष्टयुत्सर्भेण वै प्रजा:।

आप्याययन्ते TAT यज्ञा: कल्याणहेतव:॥ ८॥

निष्पाद्यन्ते नरैस्तैस्तु स्वधर्म्मभिरतैस्तत:।

विशुद्धाचरणोपेतै: af: सन्मार्गगामिभि:।॥ <u

स्वर्गापवर्गौ मानुष्यात् प्राप्नुवन्ति नरा मुने।

यथाभिरुचितं wrt ag यान्ति मनुजा fist १०॥

प्रजास्ता ब्रह्मणा सृष्टाश्चातुर्वर्ण्यव्यवस्थितौ।

सम्यक्श्रद्धासमाचारप्रवणा मुनिसत्तम।। ११॥|

ययेच्छावासनिरता: सर्वबाधाविवजिता:।

शुद्धान्त:रकरणा: शुद्धा: सर्वानुष्ठाननिर्म्मला:।। १२॥

Ys च तासां मनसि शुद्धेऽन्त:संस्थिते हरौ।

Ys ज्ञानं प्रपश्यन्तिं विघ्ण्वाख्यं येन तत्पदम्।। १३॥

तत: कालात्मको योऽसौ स चांश: कथितो हरे:।

स पातयत्यघं घोरमल्पमल्पाल्यसारवत्।। १४॥

अधर्म्मवीजसम्भूतं तमोलोभसमुद्भवम्।

प्रजासु तासु मैत्रेय रागादिकमसाधकम्।। १५॥

तत: सा सहसा सिद्धिस्तेषां नातीव जायते।

रसोल्लासादयश्चान्या: सिद्धयोऽष्टौ भवन्ति at १६॥

तासु क्षीणास्वशेषासु वर्द्धमाने च पातके।

द्वन्द्वाभिभवदु:खार्त्तस्ता भवन्ति तत: प्रजा:।। १७॥

These he created for the performance of

sacrifices, the four castes being the fit
instruments of their celebration. By sacrifices,
oh you who know the truth, the gods are
nourished; and by the rain which they bestow,

mankind are supported*: and thus sacrifices,
the source of happiness, are performed by

paths of virtue. Men acquire (by them)
heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they go,
after death, to whatever sphere they aspire to,
as the consequence of their human nature. The
beings who were created by Brahma, of these
four castes, were at first endowed with
righteousness and perfect faith; they abode
wherever they pleased, unchecked by any
impediment; their hearts were free from guile,
they were pure, made tree from soil by
observance of sacred institutes. In their
sanctified minds Hari dwelt; and they were
filled with perfect wisdom, by which they
contemplated the glory of Visnu.’ After a
while (after the Treté age had continued for
some period), that portion of Hari which has
been described as one with K4la (time) infused
into created beings sin, as yet feeble though
formidable, or passion and the like: the
impediment of soul's liberation, the seed of
iniquity, sprung from darkness and desire. The
innate perfectness of human nature was then
no more evolved: the eight kinds of perfection,
Rasollaga and the rest, were impaired;* and
these being enfeebled, and sin gaining
strength, mortals were afflicted with pain,
arising from susceptibility to contrast, as heat
and cold, and the like.

ततो दुर्गाणि ताश्चक्रुर्वारक्षं पार्वतमौदकम्।
कृत्रिमं च तथा ot yt खर्वटकादिकम्।। १८॥
yer च यथान्यायं ag चक्रु: पुरादिषु।
शीतातपादिबाधानां प्रशमाय महामुने।। १९॥
प्रतीकारमिदं कृत्वा शीतादेस्ता: प्रजा:पुन:।
वार्ततोपायं तत्तश्चक्रुर्हस्तसिद्धिं च कर्मजाम्॥ २ gl
ब्रीहयश्च यवाश्चैव गोधूमा अणवस्तिला:।
प्रियङ्गवो ह्युदाराश्च कोरदूषा: सचीकणा:।। २१॥
माषा मुद्गा मसूराश्च निष्पावा: सकुलत्यका:।
आढक्यश्चणकाश्चैव शणा: सप्तदश: स्मृता:।। २२॥
They therefore constructed places of

refuge, protected by trees, by mountains, or by
water; surrounded them by a ditch or a wall,
