BOOK IT, CHAP. 3

151

‘between the seas means within Malyavat and
Gandhamadana; माल्यवद्गन्धमादनयोर्मध्यार्णवस्यान्तवर्यवस्थितौ।
The Bhagavata describes these eight mountains as
circling Meru for 18000 Yojanas in each direction,
leaving, according to the commentator, an interval
of a thousand Yojanas between them and the base
of the central mountain, and being 2000 high, and
as many broad: thcy may be understood to be the
exterior barriers of Meru, separating it from Ilavrta.
The names of these mountains, according to the
Bhagavata, are Jathara and Devakiita on the east,
Pavana and Paripatra on the west. Trsriiga and
Makara on the north, and Kailasa and Karavira on
the south. Without believing it possible to verify
the position of these different creations of the
legendary geography of the Hindus, it can scarcely
admit of doubt that the scheme was suggested by
imperfect acquaintance with the actual character of
the country, by the four great ranges, the Altai,
Muztag or Thian-shan, Ku-en-lun, and Himalaya,
which traverse central Asia in the direction from
east to west, with a greater or less inclination from
north to south, which are connected or divided by
many lofty transverse ridges, which enclose several
large lakes, and which give rise to the great rivers
that water Siberia, China, Tartary, and Hindustan.
(Humboldt ०० the Mountains of Central Asia, and
Ritter Geogr. Asia.)

15. More ample details of the Vargas are given in
the Mahabharata, Bhagavata, Padma, Vayu, Kirma,
Linga. Matsya, and Markandeya Puranas; but they
are of an entirely fanciful nature. Thus of the
Ketum4ala-varsa it is Said, in the Vayu. the men are
black, the women of the complexion of the lotus;
the people subsist upon the fruit of the Panasa or
jack-tree, and live for ten thousand years, exempt
from sorrow or sickness: seven Kula or main ranges
of mountains in it are named and a long list of
countries and rivers is added, none of which can be
identified with any actually existing, except
perhaps the great river the Sucaksus the Amu or
Oxus. According to the Bhagavata, Visnu is
worshipped as Kamadeva id Ketumala. The Vayu
says the object of adoration there is Ivara, the son
of Brahma. Similar circumstances are asserted of
the other VarsSas. See also As. Res. VIII. 352.

aR
