BOOK I, CHAP. 11

69

CHAPTER 11
एकादशोऽध्याय:
(ध्रुवोपाख्यानम्)
षराशर उवाच

प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ wal: स्वायम्भुवस्य तु।

Bt पुत्रौ querdtait धर्मज्ञौ कथितौ तव॥ en
तयोरुत्तानपादस्य सुरुच्यामुत्तम: सुत:।
अभीष्टायामभूद् व्रह्मन् पितुरत्यन्तवल्लभ:। २॥
सुनीतिर्नाम या राज्ञस्तस्याभून्महिषी द्विज।

स नातिप्रोतिमांस्तस्यां तस्याश्चाभूद् Yar: सुत:॥ ३॥
राजासनस्थितस्याङ्कं पितुरभ्रातरमाश्रितम्।

दृष्टोत्तमं gaara तमारोढुं मनोरथम्।४॥

प्रत्यक्षं भूपतिस्तस्या: सुरुच्या नाभ्यनन्दत।
प्रणयेनागतं पुत्रमुत्सङ्गारोहणोत्सुकम्॥ ५॥

Paraiara continued—I mentioned to you,
that the Manu Svayam-bhuva had two heroic
and pious sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada. Of
these two, the latter had a son whom he dearly
loved. Uttama, by his favourite wife Suruci.
By his queen, named Suniti. to whom he was
less attached, he also had a son, called
Dhruva'. Observing his brother Uttama on the
lap of his father, as he was seated upon his
throne, Dhruva was desirous of ascending to
the same place; but as Suruci was present, the
Raja did not gratify the desire of his son,
respectfully wishing to be taken on his father's
knee.
मैत्रेय उवाच

सपत्नीतनयं BET तमङ्कारोहणोत्सुकम्।

fag: पुत्रं तदारूढं सुरुचिर्वाद्यमब्रवीत्।॥ ६॥
क्रियते for got वत्स महानेष मनोरथ:।
अन्यस्त्रीगर्भजातेन असम्भूय ममोदरे॥ ७॥
उत्तमोत्तममप्राप्यमविवेकोऽभिवाञ्छसि।

सत्यं सुतस्त्वमप्यस्य किन्तु न त्वं मया धृत:।८॥
एतद् राजासनं सर्वभूभृत्संश्रयकेतनम्।

are ममैव पुत्रस्य किमात्मा क्लिश्यते त्वया।। ९॥
उच्चैर्मनोरथस्तेऽयं मत्पुत्रस्येव fe gem
सुनीत्यामात्मनो जन्म किं त्वया नावगम्यते।। १०॥

Maitreya said— Beholding the child of her
rival thus anxious to be placed on his father's
lap, and her own son already seated there,
Suruci thus addressed the boy: “Why, child, do
you vainly indulge in such presumptuous
hopes? You are born from a different mother,
and are no son of mine, that you should aspire
inconsiderately to a station fit for the excellent
Uttama alone. It is true you are the son of the
Raja, but I have not given you birth. This regal
throne, the seat of the king of kings, is suited
to my son only; why should you aspire to its
occupation ? Why idly cherish such lofty
ambition, as if you were my son ? Do you
forget that you are but the offspring of
Suniti?”*

WUE उवाच ।
उत्सृज्य पितरं बालस्तच्छू त्वा मातृभाषितम्।
जगाम कुपितो मातुर्निजाया द्विज मन्दिरम्।। eet
तं दृष्टा कुपितं पुत्रमीषत्प्रस्फुरिताधरम्।
सुनीतिरङ्कमारोप्य मैत्रैयैतदभाषत।। १२॥
वत्स क: कोपहेतुस्ते कश्च wat नाभिनन्दति।
कोऽवज्रानाति पितरं तव यस्तेऽपराध्यति॥ १३॥

Paraiara continued— The boy, having heard
the speech of his step-mother, quitted his
father, and repaired in a passion to the
apartment of his own mother’; who, beholding
him vexed, took him upon her lap, and, gently
smiling, asked him what was the cause of his
anger, who had displeased him, and if any one,
forgetting the respect due to his father, had
bchaved ill to him.

इत्युक्त: सकलं मात्रे कथयामास तद्यथा।
सुरुचि: wre भूपालप्रत्यक्षमपि गर्विता।। १४॥
श्वासक्षामेक्षणा दीना सुनीतिर्वाक्यमब्रवीत्।। १५॥

Dhruva, in reply, repeated to her all that the
arrogant Suruci had said to him in the presence
of the king. Deeply distressed by the narrative
of the boy, the humble Suniti, her eyes
dimmed with tears, sighed, and said,
