BOOK I, CHAP. 5

Varaha, but no particular individual is specified,
nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon
their discomfiture. The Kalika Upapurdna has an
absurd legend of a conflict between Siva as a
Sarabha. a fabulous animal, and Visnu as the
Varaha, in which the latter suffers himself and his
offspring begotten upon earth to be slain.

7. This, which is nothing more than the
development of the notion that the Varaha
incarnation typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is
repeated in most of the Puranas in the same or
nearly the same words.

8. This seems equivalent to the ancient notion of
a plastic nature: “All parts of matter, by reason of a
certain life in them, being supposed able to form
themselves artificially and methodically to the
greatest advantage of their present respective
capabilities.” This, which Cudworth (c. Tl) calls
hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active
creator: “not that he should, avtovpyav anavta,
set his own hand to every work, which, as “Aristotle
says, would be, unbecoming God; but, as in the
case of Brahma and other subordinate agents, that
they should occasion the various developments of
crude nature to take place, by supplying that will.
of which nature itself is incapable. Action being
once instituted by an instrumental medium, or by
the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by
powers or a vitality inherent in nature or the matter
of creation itself. The efficiency of such
subordinate causes was advocated by Plato,
Aristotle, and others; and the opinion of Zeno. as
stated by Laertius, might be taken for a translation
of some such passage as that in our text ; “Eat de
१४०८ ६८ avtn& Kocwevn Kata aneppatkave
Aoyové, anoTM@AOVOG TE KM avegovaa ta ६८
avtnd sv @popsevore EpoOvorg, Kat toravtTa
dpaaa a'h ०0४ anex16n Nature is a habit moved
from itself, according to seminal principles;
perfecting and containing those several things
which in determinate times are produced from it,
and acting agreeably to that from which it was
secreted.’ Intell, system, [. 328. ३8० the
commentator illustrates our text by observing that
the cause of the budding of rice is in its own seeds,
and its development is from itself, though its
growth takes place only at a determinate season , in

consequence of the instrumental agency of the rain.
३९३९ १९
