BOOK VI, CHAP. 7

561

केशिध्वजोऽपि मुक्त्यर्थं स्वकर्मक्षपणोन्मुख:।

ays विषयान् कर्म चक्रे चानभिसंहितम्।। १० 311

स कल्पनोपभोगैश्च क्षीणपापोऽमलस्तथा।

अवाप सिद्धिमत्यन्तं तापक्षयफलां fast १०४॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे षष्ठांशे सप्तम: अध्याय:॥

Accordingly king Kegidhvaja, after
receiving suitable homage from Khandikya,
returned to his city. Khandikya, having
nominated his son Raja, retired to the woods
to accomplish his devotions, his whole mind
being intent upon Govinda: there his entire
thoughts being engrossed upon one only
object, and being purified by practices of
restraint, self-control, and the rest, he obtained
absorption into the pure and perfect spirit
which is termed Visnu. Kesidhvaja also, in
order to attain liberation, became averse from
his own perishable works, and lived amidst
objects of sense (without regarding them,) and
instituted religious rites without expecting
therefrom any advantages to himself. Thus by
pure and auspicious fruition, being cleansed
from all sin, he also obtained that perfection
which assuages all affliction for ever.

NOTES

1. The text is somewhat obscure, but it is in
some degree cleared up by the illustration. No one
would think of applying the property of self-— the
idea of possession or personality— to soul, separated
from body: but the objection is equally applicable
to soul in the body; for whilst there it is as distinct
in its nature from the materials of body as if it was
disembodied, and quite as incapable of individual
personal fruition.

2. That is, in the race of princes of Mithila.

3. The term Yoga (योग:), which is that used in
the text, in its literal acceptation signifies ‘union’,
‘junction’ from 4 ‘to join:’ in a spiritual sense it
denotes ‘union of separated with universal soul;’
and with some latitude of expression it comes to
signify the means by which such union is effected.
In the Bhagavad Gita it is variously applied, but
ordinarily denotes the performance of religious
ceremonies as a duty, and not for interested

purposes. Thus Krsna says to Arjuna, योगस्थ: कुरु
sem “Engaging in Yoga, perform ites,
Dhanafijaya, being indifferent to success or failure:
such indifferences is called Yoga.” Il. v. ‘48. It is
elsewhere defined, ‘exemption from the contact of
pain: aaa वियोगं योगसंज्ञितं। VI. v. 23. The word
has been accordingly rendered ‘devotion’ by
Wilkins, and ‘devotio’ by Schlegel, in their
translations of the Gita. In this place, however, it is
used in a less general sense, and signifies, as is
subsequently explained, reunion with spirit through
the exercises necessary to perfect abstruction as
they are taught and practised by the followers of
Patanijali.

4. This illustration is however only to a limited
extent, explanatory of the nature of Yoga; for
though the loadstone and iron unite, by virtue of a
community of kind, yet the union that takes place is
only that of contiguity, Samyoga (संयोग), not that of
identification or unity. Tadaikyam (#44). Some
further explanation therefore is required.

5. The first stage is the Atma prayatna, the
practice of moral and religious restraint, Yama,
Niyama, &c. When the novice is perfect in these,
then he is fit to attain the perfectibility of an adept,
through the especial practices which treatises on the
Yoga prescribe. When the mind has attained the
state which can alone be attained through them,
then the union with Brahma, which is the
consequence, is called Yoga:

Tena: तस्या ब्रह्मणि संयोगो योग इत्यभिधीयते।। The Atma
prayatna is defined to be that which has Yama, &c.
for its objects, यमनियमादिविषय:। The next phrase,
तत्सापेक्षा, is explained तदधीना ‘depending upon, or
relating to, such control.’ मनोगति is the same as
मनोवृत्ति condition or state of mind which is विशिष्टा
perfected: of that state of mind, union with Brahma,
is Yoga. Union with Brahma is the abstraction that
proposes the identity of the living with the supreme
spirit of the Jivatma, with Brahma;

it and Yoga is understanding of the
identity of the contemplator and the object
contemplated; ध्यातृध्येयैक्यधी:। A text of Yajiiavalkya
is quoted to this effect: ज्ञानं > fats
“Know holy wisdom to be the same with Yoga’ (the
practice of) which has eight divisions. That which
is termed Yoga is union of the living with the
supreme soul.’
