BOOK IV, 24

407

However this may be, it seems correct to separate
the thirteen sons or families of the Vindhya
princess most from the three Bahlikas and them
from the Puspamitras and Patumitras, who
governed Mekala, a country on the Narbada (see
Bk. II. Ch. III. n. 18). What the Bahlikas or princes
of Balkh, had to do in this part of India is doubtful.
The Durmitra of the Bhagavata has been
conjectured by Tod (Trans. R. As. Soc. 1. 325) to be
intended for the Bactrian prince Demetrius : but it
is not clear that cven the Bhagavata considers this
prince as ore of the Bahlikas and the name occurs
nowhere else.

68. For the situation of Kosala, see Bk.II. Ch. III.
n. 79. The three copies of the Vayu read Komala
and call the kings, the Meghas, more strong than
sapient : कोमलायां तु राजानो भविष्यन्ति महाबला: Fer इति
समाख्याता बुद्धिमन्तो न a च तु। The Bhagavata agrees
with our text. The Vayu says of the Naisadhas or
kings of Nisadha, that they were all of the race of
Nala; नलवंश प्रसृता:। The Bhagavata adds two other
races, seven Andhras (see note 63) and kings of
Vaidira, with the remark that these were all
contemporaries, being, as the commentator
observes, petty or provincial rulers

:।

69. The Vayu has Visvasphani and Visvasphini :
the Bhagavata, ViSvasphirtti or in some Mss.
Visvaphirji. The castes he establishes or places in
authority, to the exclusion of the Ksatriyas, are
called in all the copies of our text Kaivarttas, Patus,
Pulindas and Brahmanas. The Vayu (three MSS.)
has Kaivarttas, Paficakas, Pulindas and Brahmanas :
aay पंचकांश्चैव युलिन्दान्ब्राह्मणान्तथा। The Bhagavata has,
Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas. The Vayu describes
Visvasphani as a great warrior and apparently as a
eunuch विश्वस्फाणि विष्णुसमो बली।
विश्चस्फाणिर्नरपति क्लीवा विकृतिरूप्यते॥ He worshipped the
gods and manes and dying on the banks of the
Ganges went to the heaven of Indra : जाह्नवीतीरमासाद्य
शरीर त्यक्ष्यते बली संन्यस्य शरीरं तं शक्रलोकं गमिष्यति।

70. Such appears to be the purport of our text
नव नागा: पंद्यावत्यां ararqeat Hepreray | गंगाप्रयागं मागधागुप्ताश्च
भोक्ष्यन्ति।। The nine Nagas might be thought to mean
the same as the descendants of Sesanaga, but the
Vayu has another series here, analogous to that of
the text : 'The nine Naka kings will possess the city
Campavati and the seven Nagas (?) the pleasant
city Mathura. Princes of the Gupta race will posses

all these countries, the banks of the Ganges to
Prayaga and Saketa and Magadha :' नव नाकास्तुभोक्ष्यन्ति
पुरी चम्पावतीं नृपा:। मथुरां च पुरीं रम्यां नागा भोक्ष्यन्ति सप्त वै।
अनुफ्याप्रयप्ताचसकितमगघास्तथा।एतान्जनपदान्सज्जांन् भोक्ष्यन्ते
गुप्तवंशजा:॥ This account is the most explicit and
probably most accurate, of all. The Nakas were
Rajas of Bhagalpur; the Nagas, of Mathura; and the
intermediate countries along the Ganges were
governed by the Guptas or Rajas of the Vaisya
caste. The Bhagavata seems to have taken great
liberties with the account, as it makes Visvasphartti
king over Anuganga, the course of the Ganges from
Haridvara, according to the commentator, to
Prayga, residing at Padmavati : वीर्य्यवान् क्षत्रमुत्सार्य्य
waa स a पुरि। अनुगंगामाप्रयागं गुप्तां भोक्ष्यन्ति मेदिनीं।।
omitting the Nagas altogether and converting
‘gupta' into an epithet of 'medini,' the preserved or
protected earth. Wilford considers the Nagas,
Nakas and Guptas to be all the same : he says,
‘Then came a dynasty of nine kings, called the nine
Nacas or Nagas; these were an obscure tribe, called
for that reason Guptavarigas, who ruled in
Padmavati’. That city he calles Patna, but in the
Malati and Madhava Padmivati lies amongst the

: Vindhya hills Kantipuri he makes Kotwal, near

Gwalior. The reading of the Vayu, Campavati,
however, obviates the necessity of all vague
conjecture. According to Wilford there is a
powerful tribe still called Nakas between the
Yamuna and the Betva. Of the existence and power
of the Guptas, however, we have recently had
ample proofs from inscriptions and coins, as in the
Candragupta and Samudragupta of the Allatabad
column; Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March and June,
1834; and Kumiaragupta, Candragupta,
Samudragupta, Sagigupta, on the Archer coins,
found at Kanauj and elsewhere; As. Res. XVII. pl.
1. fig. 5, 7, 13, 19; and Journ. As. Soc. Bengal,
Nov. 1835, pl. 38 and 39; and in other numbers of
the same Journal : in all which, the character in
which the legends are written is of a period prior to

: the use of the modern Devanagari and was current

in all probability about the fifth century of our era,
as conjectured by Prinsep : see his table of the
modifications of the Sanskrit alphabet from 543
B.C. to 1200 A.D. Journ. As. Soc. Bengal, March,
1838.

71. The Vayu also mentions the descendants of
Devaraksita or Daivaraksitas as kings of the
