BOOK I, CHAP. 5

31

श्वापदो द्विखुरो हस्ती वानर: षक्षिपंचम:।

औदका: पशव: षष्ठा: `पप्तमास्तु सरीसृपा:॥५१॥

O foremost of the Bramanas! Brahma
having created, in the commencement of the
Kalpa various plants, employed them in
sacrifices, in the beginning of the Treta age.
Animals were distinguished into two classes,
domestic (village) and wild (forest): the first
class contained the cow, goat, the hog, the
sheep, the horse, the ass, the mule: the latter,
all beasts of prey, and many animals with
cloven hoofs, the elephant, and the monkey.
The fifth order were the birds; the sixth,
aquatic animals; and the seventh, reptiles and
insects””.

गायत्रं च ऋचश्चैव त्रिवृत्स्तोमं रथन्तरम्।

अग्निष्टोमं च यज्ञानां निर्म्ममे प्रथमान् मुखात्।५२॥

बृहत् साम तथोक्थं च दक्षिणादसृजन् मुखात्।। ५३॥

सामानि जगतीछन्द:स्तोमं सप्तदशं तथा।
वैरूपमतिरात्रं च पक्चिमादसृजन् मुखात्।५४॥
एकविंशमधर्वाणमाप्तोर्यामाणमेव च।

अनुष्टुभं स वैराजम् उत्तरादसृजन् मुखात्॥५५॥

From his eastern mouth Brahma then
created the Gayatri metre, the Rgveda. the
collection of hymns termed Trivrt, the
Rathantara portion of the Samaveda, and the
Agnistoma sacrifice: from his southern mouth
he created the Yajurveda, the Tristubh metre.
the collection of hymns called Panchadga, the
Brhat Sama, and the portion of the Sama-veda
termed Uktha: from his western mouth he
created the Sama-veda, the Jayati metre, the
collection of hymns termed Saptadasa, the
portion of the Sama called Vairipa, and the
Atiratra sacrifice: and from his northern mouth
he created the Ekavirhga collection of hymns,
the Atharva-veda. the Aptoryama rite, the
Anustubh metre, and the Vairaja portion of the

Sama-veda"!,

उच्चावचानि भूतानि wee जज्ञिरे।
देवासुरपितॄन् BET मनुष्यांश्च प्रजापति:।। ५ ६॥

Wa: पुन: Waalel स कल्पस्य पितामह:।

यक्षान् पिशाचान् गन्धर्वास्तथैवाप्सरसां TTT ५७॥
नरकिन्नररक्षांसि aa: पशुमृगोरगान्।
अव्ययं च व्ययं चैव यदिदं स्थाणुजङ्गमम्॥५८)।
तत् Tea तदा ब्रह्मा भगवानादिकृद् विभु:।

तेषां ये यानि कर्म्मणि प्राक सृष्ट्यां प्रतिपेदिरे॥५९॥

तद्भाविता: प्रपद्यन्ते तस्मात् तत् तस्य रोचते।। ६०॥

In this manner all creatures, great or small,
proceeded ffom his limbs. The great
progenitor of the world having termcd the
gods, demons, and Pitrs, created, in the
commencement of the Kalpa, the Yaksas,
Pisachas (goblins), Gandharvas and the troops
of Apsarasas the nymphs of heaven, Nards
(centaurs, or beings with the limbs of horses
and human bodies) and Kinnaras beings with
the heads of horses), Raksasas, birds, beasts,
dcer, serpents, and all things permanent or
transitory, movable or immovable. This did
the divine Brahma, the first creator and lord of
all: and these things being created, discharged
the same functions as they had fulfilled in a
previous creation, whether malignant or
benign, gentle or cruel, good or evil, true or
false; and accordingly as they are actuated by
such propensities will be their conduct.

इद्रियार्थेषु भूतेषु शरीरेषु च स प्रभु:।

ame विनियोगश्च धातैव व्यसृजत् स्वयम्॥ ६ HI

नामरूपं च भूतानां कृत्यानां च प्रपञ्चनम्।

वेदशब्देभ्य एवादौ देवादीनां चकार: स:।॥६२॥

ॠषीणां नामधेयानि यथा वेदश्रुतानि वै।

यथा नियोगयोग्यानि सर्वेषामपि सोऽकरोत्।॥ ६ ३॥

यथर्त्तव्रृतुलिङ्गानि नानारूपाणि पर्य्यये।

दृश्यन्ते तानि तान्येव तथा भावा युगादिषु। ६४॥

सिसृक्षाशक्तियुक्तोऽसौ सृज्यशक्तिप्रचोदित:।। ६५॥
इति श्रीष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे पञ्चमोऽध्याय:
