BOOK I, CHAP. 12

considered, and therefore have propitiated me.
The man who worships me obtains speedy
liberation from life. What is heaven to one
whose mind is fixed on me ?

त्रैलोक्यादधिके स्थाने सर्वताराग्रहाश्रय:।

भविष्यति न Weel मत्प्रसादाद् भवान् TaN ९०॥
सूर्यात् सोमात् तथा भौमात् सोमपुत्राद् बृहस्पते।
सितार्कतनयादीनां सर्वरक्षाणां तथा ga ९१॥
सप्तर्षीणामशेषाणां ये तु वैमानिका: सुरा:।
सर्वेषामुपरि wr तव दत्तं मया ध्रुव।।९२॥
केचिचतुर्युगं यावत् केचिन्मन्वन्तरं सुरा:।

तिष्ठन्ति भवतो दत्ता मया वै कल्पसंस्थिति:।। ९३॥
सुनीतिरपि ते माता त्वदासन्नातिनिर्म्मला।

विमाने तारका भूत्वा तावत् कालं निवत्स्यति।। ९४॥
ये च त्वां मानवा: प्रात: सायञ्च सुसमाहिता:।
कीर्त्तयिष्यन्ति तेषाञ्च महत् पुण्यं भविष्यति।। ९५॥

A station shall be assigned to you. ‘Dhruva,
above the three worlds’; one in which you
shall sustain the stars and the planets; a station
above those of the sun, the moon. Mars, the
son of Soma (Mercury), Venus. the son of
Strya (Saturn), and all the other
constellations; above the regions of the seven
Rsis, and the divinities who traverse the
atmosphcre’. Some celestial beings endure for
four ages; some for the reign of a Manu: to
you shall he granted the duration of a Kalpa.
Your mother Sumati, in the orb of a bright
star, shall abide near you for a similar term;
and all those who, with minds attentive, shall

glorify you at dawn or at eventide, shall
acquire exceeding religious merit.

पराशर sara
एवं पूर्वं जगन्नाथाद् देवदेवाज्जनार्दनात्।
वरं प्राप्य ध्रुव: स्थानमध्यास्ते स महामते।। ९६॥
तस्यापि मानमृद्धिञ्च महिमानं निरीक्ष्य च।
देवासुराणामाचार्य्य: श्लोकमत्रोशना जगौ।। ९७॥
अहोऽस्य तपसो वीर्य्यमहोऽस्य तपस: फलम्।
यदेनं पुरत: कृत्वा Ta सप्तर्षय: स्थिता:॥९८॥
gaa जननी चेयं सुनीतिर्नाम सूनृता।
अस्याश्च महिमानं क: शक्तो वर्णयितुं भुवि॥ ९९॥

79
स्थानं प्राप्ता at कृत्वा या कुक्षिविवरे ध्रुवम्।। go ot
यश्चैतत् कीर्त्तयेन्नित्यं ध्रुवस्यारोहणं दिवि।

स सर्वपापनिर्ममुक्त स्वर्गलोके महीयते।। १० १॥
स्थानभ्रंशं न चाप्नोति दिवि वा यदि वा भुवि।

सर्वकल्याणसंयुक्तो दीर्घकालञ्च जीवति।। १० २॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे द्वादशोऽध्याय:

Thus the sage Dhruva, having received a
boon from Janarddana, the lord of gods, and
lord of the world, resides in an exalted station.
Beholding his glory, Usanas, the preceptor of
the gods and demons, repeated these verses:
“Wonderful is the efficacy of this penance,
marvellous is its reward, that the seven Rsis
should” be preceded by Dhruva. This too is the
pious Suniti, his parent, who is called
Sonrta!?." Who can celebrate her greatness,
who. having given birth to Dhruva, has
become the asylum of the three worlds,
enjoying to all future time an elevated station,
a station eminent above all? He who shall
worthily describe the ascent into the sky of
Dhruva, for ever shall be freed from all sin,
and enjoy the heaven of Indra. Whatever be
his dignity, whether upon earth or in heaven he
shall never fall from it, but shall long enjoy
life. possessed of every blessing".

NOTES

1. A marginal note by a Bengali Pandit asserts it
to be a fact, then when a jackal carries a piece of
meat in his mouth, it shows in the dark as if it was
on fire.

2. The commentator understands this passage to
imply merely that the supreme pervades both
substance and space, being infinitely vast, and
without limit. 'Having a thousand heads’ etc.
denotes only infinite extension ; and the ‘ten inches
beyond the contact of the universe’ expresses
merely non-restriction by its boundaries.
दशाङ्गुलमित्याधिक्यमात्रं अतोऽयमर्थ: सावरणं ब्रह्माण्डं स्पृष्टाभिव्याप्य
`तदतिक्रम्य निरवधिर्भगवान् स्थितं इति॥

3. Explained severally the Brahmanda, or
material universe; Brahma. the creator : Manu. the
ruler of the period; and supreme or presiding spirit
