BOOK III, CHAP. 18

a benevolent aspect and speaking in soft and
agreeable tones, addressed others of the same
family and said to him,

मायामोह उवाच
स्वर्गार्थं यदि at वाञ्छा निर्याणार्धमथासुरा:।
तदलं पशुघातादिदुष्टधर्मैर्निबोधत॥ १५॥
विज्ञानमयमेवैतदशेषमवगच्छत।
बुध्यध्वं मे वच: सम्यग् बुधैरेवमुदीरितम्।। १६॥

"If, mighty demons, you cherish a desire
either for heaven or for final repose, desist
from the iniquitous massacre of animals (for
sacrifice) and hear from me what you should
do, Know that all that exists is composed of
discriminative knowledge. Understand my
words, for they have been uttered by the wise.

जगदेतदनाधारं भ्रान्तिज्ञानार्थतत्परम्।

रागादिदुष्टमत्यर्थं भ्राम्यते भवसङ्कटे।। १७॥

This world subsists without support and
engaged in the pursuit of error, which it
mistakes for knowledge, as well as vitiated by
passion and the rest, revolves in the straits of
existence."

पराशरं उवाच
एवं बुध्यत बुध्यत्वं बुध्यतैवमितीरयन्।
मायामोह: स दैतेयान् धर्ममत्याजयन्निजम्।। १८॥
नानाप्रकारवचनं स तेषां युक्तियोजितम्।
तथा TA च तद्धर्मं तत्यजुस्ते यथा यथा।। १९॥
तेऽप्यन्येषां तथैवोचुरन्यैरन्ये तथोदिता:।
मैत्रेय! तत्यजुर्धर्मं वेदस्मृत्युदितं परम्॥ २०॥

ParaSara said— In this manner, exclaiming
to them, "Know!" (Budhyadvam) and they
replying, “It is known" (Budhyati), these
Daityas were induced by the arch deceiver to
deviate from their religious duties (and
become Bauddhas), by his repeated arguments
and variously urged persuations.° When they
had abandoned their own faith, they persuaded
others to do the same and the heresy spread
and any deserted the practices enjoined by the
Vedas and the laws.

291

अन्यानप्यन्यपाषण्डप्रकारैर्बहुभिर्दविज।
दैतेयान् मोहयामास मायामोहोऽतिमोहकृत्।। २ १॥
स्वल्पेनैव हि कालेन मायामोहेन तेऽसुरा:।

मोहितास्तत्यजु: at त्रयीमार्गाश्रितां कथाम्।। २२॥
यज्ञकर्मकलापस्य तथान्ये च द्विजन्मनाम्।। २३॥

The delusions of the false teacher paused
not with the conversion of the Daityas to the
Jaina and Bauddha heresies, but with various
efroneous tenets he prevailed upon others to
apostatise, until the whole were led astray and
deserted the doctrines and observances
inculcated by the three Vedas. Some then
spoke evil of the sacred books; some
blasphemed the gods; some treated sacrifices
and other devotional ceremonies with scorn;
and others calumniated the Brahmanas.

हवींष्यनलदग्धानि फलायेत्यर्भकोदितम्॥ २४॥
यज्ञैरनेकैर्देवत्वमवाप्येन्द्रेण भुज्यते।

शम्यादि यदि चेत्काष्ठं Tat पत्रभुक् पशु:।। २५॥
निहतस्य पशोर्यज्ञे स्वर्गप्राप्तिर्यदीष्यते।

स्वपिता यजमानेन किन्नु तस्मान्न हन्यते।। २६॥

"The precepts," they cried, “that lead to the
injury of animal life (as in sacrifices) are
highly reprehensible. To say that casting butter
into flame is productive of reward, is mere
childishness. If Indra, after having obtained,
godhead by multiplied rites, is fed upon the
wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is lower than
a brute, which feeds at least upon leaves. If an
animal slaughtered in religious worship is
thereby raised to heaven, would it not be
expedient for a man who instritutes a sacrifice
to kill his own father for a victim?

कुर्याच्छाद्धं श्रद्धयान्नं न वहरेयु: प्रवासिन:।। २७॥
जनश्रद्धेयमित्येतदवगम्य ततो वच:।

उपेक्ष्य श्रेयसे वाक्यं रोचतां यन्मयेरितम्॥ २८॥
न ह्याप्तवादा नभसो निपतन्ति महासुरा:।
