62

their weapons, fell upon them; but the gods,
into whom the ambrosial draught had infused
new vigour, defeated and put their host to
flight, and they fled through the regions of
space, and plunged into the subterraneous
realms of Patal. The gods thereat greacly
rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the
discus and mace, and resumed their reign in
heaven.

तत: प्रसन्नभा: Wet: प्रययौ स्वेन वर्त्मना।
ज्योतींषि च यथामार्गं प्रययुर्मुनिसत्तम।। ११२॥
जज्वाल भगवांश्चोच्चैश्चारूदीप्तिर्विभावसु:।
धर्म्म च सर्वभूतानां तदा मतिरजायत।। ११३॥

The sun shone with renovatcd splendour,
and again discharged his appointed task; and
the celestial luminaries again circled, oh best
of Munis, in their respective orbits. Fire once
more blazed aloft, beautiful in splendour; and
the minds of all beings were animated by
devotion.

त्रैलोक्यञ्च श्रिया ye बभूव मुनिसत्तम।

शक्रश्च त्रिदशश्रेष्ठ: YA: श्रीमानजायत।। ११४॥
सिहासनगत: शक्र: सम्प्राप्य त्रिदिवं पुन:।
देवराज्ये स्थितो देवीं तुष्टावाब्जकरां AA ११५॥

The three worlds again were rendered
happy by prosperity; and Indra, the chief of
the gods, was restored to power. Seated upon
his throne, and once more in heaven,
exercising sovereignty over the gods, Sakra
thus eulogized the goddess who bears a lotus
in her hand:

इन्द्र उवाच
नमस्ते सर्वभूतानां जननीमब्जसम्भवाम्।
श्रियमुन्निद्रपद्माक्षीं विष्णोर्वक्ष:स्थलस्थिताम्।। ११६॥
त्वं सिद्धिस्त्वं ger स्वाहा स्वधा त्वं लोकपावनि।
सन्ध्या रात्रि: प्रभा भूतिर्मेधा श्रद्धा सरस्वती।। ११७॥
यज्ञविद्या महाविद्या गुह्यविद्या च शोभने।
आत्मविद्या च देवि त्वं विमुक्तिफलदायिनी।। ११८॥
आन्वीक्षिकी त्रयी वार्त्त दण्डनीतिस्त्वमेव च।
सौम्यासौम्यैर्जजगदूपैस्त्वयैतद्देवि पूरितम्।। ११९॥
का त्वन्या त्वामृते देवि सर्वयज्ञमयं वपु:।

THE VISNU-PURANAM

अध्यास्ते देवदेवस्य योगिचिन्त्यं गदाभृत:।। १२ ol
त्वया देवि परित्यक्तं सकलं भुवनत्रयम्।
विनष्टप्रायमभवत् त्वयेदानीं समेधितम्।। १२ en
दारा: पुत्रास्तथागारं सुहृद् धान्यधनादिकम्।
भवत्येतन्महाभागे नित्यं त्वद्बीक्षणान्नृणाम्॥ १२ २॥
शरीरारोग्यमैश्वर्य्यमरिपक्षक्षय: सुखम्।

देवि त्वद्दृष्टिदृष्टानां पुरुषाणां न दुर्लभम्।। १२३॥

Indra said- “I bow down to Sri. the mother
of all beings, seated on her lotus throne, with
eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the
breast of Visnu. You are Siddhi (superhuman
power): you are Swadha and Svaha: you are
ambrosia (Sudha). the purifier of the universe:
you are evening, night, and dawn: you are
power, faith, intellect: you are the goddess of
letters (Sarasvati). You, beautiful goddess, are
knowledge of devotion, great knowledge,
mystic knowledge, and spiritual knowledge;
which confers eternal liberation. You are the
science of reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts
and sciences:'® you are moral and political
science. The world is peopled by you with
pleasing or displeasing forms. Who else than
you, oh goddess, is seated on that person of the
god of gods, the wielder of the mace, which is
made up of sacrifice, and contemplated by
holy ascetics? Abandoned, by you, the three
worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they have
been reanimated by you. From your propitious
gaze. oh mighty goddess, men obtain wives,
children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth.
Health and strength, power, victory, happiness,
are easy of attainment to those upon whom
you smilest.

त्वं माता सर्वभूतानां देवदेवो हरि: पिता।

त्वयैतद् विष्णुना चाद्य जगद्व्याप्तं चराचरम्।। १२४॥
मा A: कोशं तथा MS मा गृहं मा परिच्छदम्।

मा शरीरं कलत्रञ्च त्यजेथा: सर्व्वपावनि।। १२५॥

मा पुत्रान् मा सुहृद्वर्गं मा पशून् सा विभूषणम्।
त्यजेथा मम देवस्य विष्णोर्वक्ष:स्थलालये।। १२६॥
त्यज्यन्ते ते नरा: सद्य: सम्त्यक्ता ये त्वयामले।। १२७॥
