472

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Vaisnava devotion (bhakti) : certain streaks on the
forehead, nose, cheeks, breast, and arms, which
denote a follower of Visnu. See As.Res.XV1.33.

2 The story is similarly told in the Bhagavata,
etc.

3 The bending or breaking of a bow is a
favourite incident in Hindu heroic poetry,
borrowed, no doubt, from the Ramayana, where,
however, it has an object: here it is quite gratuitous.

4 The Bhagavata enters into even fewer
particulars than our text of the place set apart for
the games. The Hari Vamsa gives a much more
detailed description, which is in some respects
curious. Fhe want of any technical glossary, and
the general manner in which technical terms are
explained in the ordinary dictionaries, reader it
difficult to understand exactly what is intended, and
any translation to the passages must be defective.
The French version, however, probably represents a
much more splendid and threatrical scene-than the
text authorizes, and may therefore admit of
correction. The general plan is nothing more than
an enclosed space, surrounded by temporary
structures of timber or bamboos, open or enclosed,
and decorated with hangings and garlands. It may
be doubted it the details described by the compiler
of the Hari Vamsa were very familiar even to him;
for his description is not always very cosistent or
precise. Of two commentators, one evidently knows
nothing of what be attempts to explain; but with the
assistance of the other the passages may be thus,
though not always confidently. rendered:

“The king, Karisa, meditating on these things,
went forth from his palace to the place which had
been prepared for the sight of the ceremonial (1). to
inspect the scaffolds (2). which had been
constructed. He found the place close set with the
several platforms (3), of the different public bodies
(4), strongly put togethcr, and decorated with
roofed pavilions of various sizes, supported by
colums. and divided into commodious chambers
(5). The edifice was extensive, well arranged,
secured by strong rafters (6) spacious and lofty, and
commodious and secure. Stairs led to the different
galleries (7). Chairs to state (8) were placed in
various parts of it. The avenues that conducted to it
were narrow (9). It was covered with temporary
stages and sheds (10), and was capable of
sustaining the weight of a multitude.

Having seen the place to the festival thus
adorned, Kama gave orders, and said, To-morrow
let the platforms and terraces and pavilions (11) be
decorated with pictures and garlands and flags and
images (12), and let them be scented with fragrant
odours, and covered over with awnings (13). Let
there be ample heaps of dry, pounded cow-dung
(14) provided on the ground, and _ suitable
refreshment chambers be covered over, and
decorated with bells and ornamented arches (15).
Let large water-jars be securely fixed in order,
capable of holding a copious supply, and provided
with golden drinking-cups. Let apartments be
prepared (16), and various kinds of beverage, in
appropriate vessels, be ready. Let judges of the
games be invited, and corporations with their
chiefs. Let orders be issued to the wrestlers, and
notice be given to the spectators; and let platforms
for their accommodation be fitted up in the place of
assembly’ "(17).

When the meeting takes place, the site of the
games is thus described: “Upon the following day
the amphitheatre (18) was filled by the citizens.
anxious to behold the games. The place of
assemby(19) was supported by octagonal painted
pillars (20), fitted up with terraces and doors and
bolts, with windows circular or crescent; shaped,
and accommodated with seats with cushions (21).
and it shone like the ocean whilst large clouds hang
upon it, with spacious, substantial pavilions (22),
fitted up for the sight of the combat; open to the
front (23). but screend with beautiful and fine
curtains (24), crowned with festoons of flowers,
and glistening with radiance like autumnal clouds.
The pavilions of the different companies and
corporations, vast as mountains, were decorated
with banners, bearing upon them the implements
and emblems of the several crafts (25). The
chambers of the inhabitants of the inner apartments
shone near at hand, bright with gold and painting
and net-work of gems: they were richly decorated
with precious stones, were enclosed below with
costly hanging, and ornamented above with spires
and banners, and looked like mountains spreading
their wings in the sky; while the rays of light
reflected from the valuable of jewel were blended
with the waving of white chowries, and the musical
tinkling of female ornaments. The separate
pavilions of the courtesans were graced by lovely
