BOOK IV, 2

307

distinguished were Vikuksi, Nimi and Danda.
Fifty of the rest, under Sakuni, were the
protectors of the northern countries. Forty-
cight were the princes of the south.®

स च इक्ष्वाकुरष्टकायामुत्पाद्य श्राद्धार्हमांसमानयेति
विकुक्षिमाज्ञापयामास॥ ४॥

स तथेति गृहीताज्ञो वनमभ्येत्यानेकान् मृगान् हत्वा
अतिश्रान्तोऽतिक्षुत्परीतो fafa शशमभक्षयत्, शेषञ्च
मांसमानीय पित्रे निवेदयामासॊ इक्ष्वाकुणापि
इक्ष्वाकुकुलाचार्य्यस्तत्पोक्षणाय वशिष्ठ: प्रचोदित: we-
अलममेनामेध्येनामिषेण। दुरात्मनानेन ते पुत्रेण
एतन्मांसमुपहतम्, यतोऽनेन शशको भक्षित:। ततश्चासौ
विकुक्षि: गुरुणैवमुक्त: शशादसंज्ञामवाप, पित्रापि च
परित्यक्त:। पितर्य्यपरते चाखिलामेतां पृथ्वीं धर्मत: शशास।
शशादस्य च परञ्जयो नाम पुत्रोऽभवत्॥ ५॥

Upon one of the days called Astvaka,’ Iks
vaku being desirous of celebrating obsequies,
ordered Vikuksi to bring him flesh suitable for
the offering. The prince accordingly went into
the forest and killed many deer and other wild
animals, for the celebration. Being weary with
the chase and being hungered, he sat down and
ate a hare; after which, being refreshed, he
carried the rest of the game to his father. Vasis
tha, the family priest of the house of Iksvaku,
was summoned to consecrate the food; but he
declared that it was impure, in consequence of
Vikuksi's having eaten a hare from amongst it
(making it thus, as it were, the residue of his
meal). Vikuksi was in consequence abandoned
by his offended father an the epithet Sasada
(hare eater) was affixed to him by the Guru.
On the death of Iksvaku, the dominion of the
carth descended to Sasada,'” who was
succeeded by his son Parafijaya.

विष्णुमाराधयाञ्चक्रु:।। ६॥
प्रसन्नश्च देवानामनादिनिधन: सकलजगत्परायणो

In the Treté age a violent war'! broke out
between the gods and the Asuras, in which the
former were vanquished. They consequently
had recourse to Visnu for assistance and
propitiated him by their adoration. The eternal
ruler of the universe, Néaraéyana, had
compassion upon them and said, "What you
desire is known unto me. Hear how your
wishes shall be fulfilled.

परञ्जयो fe नाम शशादस्य च राजर्षेस्तनय: क्षत्रियवर्य:।
तच्छरीरेऽहमंशेन स्वयमेवावतीर्य्य तानशेषानसुरान्
निहनिष्यामि, तद्भवद्भि:। परञ्जयोऽसुरवधार्थाय इह
कार्योद्योग: कार्य्य इति। एतछ्रुत्वा प्रणम्य भगवन्तं
विष्णुममरा: परञ्जयसकाशमाजग्मु:॥८॥

ऊचुश्चैनं भो: भो: क्षत्रियवर्य्य! अस्माभिरभ्यर्थितेन भवता
अस्माकमराति वधोद्यतानां साहायकं कृतमिच्छाम:। ९॥

THAT अस्माकमभ्यागतानां प्रणयभङ्गो न कार्य:।

There is an illustrious prince named
Parafijaya, the son of a royal sage; into his
person I will infuse a portion of myself and
having descended upon earth I will in his
person subdue all your enemies. Do you
therefore endeavour to secure the aid of
Parafijaya for the destruction of your foes."
Acknowledging with reverence the kindness of
the deity, the immortals quitted his presence
and repaired to Parafijaya, whom they thus
addressed :

"Most renowned Ksatriya, we have come to
you to solicit your alliance against our
enemies ; it will not become you to disappoint
our hopes.”

इत्युक्त: परञ्जय: प्राह,- सकलत्रैलोक्यनाथो ast
इत्याकर्ण्य समस्तदेवैरिद्रेण च बाढमित्येव-
मन्वीप्सितम्।। १०॥

ततश्च शतक्रतोर्वृषभरूपधारिण: ककुत्स्थो हर्षसमन्वितो

नारायण: प्राह, ज्ञातमेव wa युष्माभिर्यदभिलषितम् संमस्तानेवासुरान् निजघान। यतश्च वृषभककुत्स्थेन राज्ञा
निसूदितमसुरबलम्,

तदर्थमिदं श्रूयताम्॥७॥

सु , ततश्चासौ ककुत्स्थसंज्ञामवाप।। ११॥
