BOOK I, CHAP. 4

23

बुद्ध्या च यत् परिच्छिद्यं तदूपमखिलं aan १९॥

You are the creator of all things, their
preserver, and their destroyer, in the forms, oh
lord, of Brahma. Visnu, and Rudra, at the
seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution.
When you have devoured all things, you
reposes on the ocean that sweeps over the
world, meditated upon, oh Govinda, by the
wise. No one knows your true nature, and the
gods adore you only in the forms it has
pleased you to assume. They who are desirous
of final liberation, worship you as the supreme
Brahma; and who that adores not Vasudeva,
shall obtain emancipation? Whatever may be
apprehended by the mind. whatever may be
perceived by the senses, whatever may be
discerned by the intellect, all is but a form of
you.

त्वन्मयाऽहं SKIT त्वत्सृष्टा त्वामुपाश्रिता।
`भाधवीमिति त्रोकोऽयमभिधत्ते ततो हि APTN २०॥
जयाखिलज्ञानमय जय स्थूलमयाव्यय।

जयानन्त जयाव्यक्त जय व्यक्तमय WHT 2 21

परापरात्मन् विश्वात्मन् जय यज्ञपतेऽनघ।

त्वं यज्ञस्त्वं वषट्कारस्त्वमोंकारस्त्वमग्नय:।। २२॥

त्वं वेदास्त्वं तदङ्गानि त्वं यज्ञपुरुषो हरे।

सूर्यादयो ग्रहास्तारा नक्षत्राण्यखिलं जगत्।। २३॥

मूर्ब्रमूर्त्तमदृश्यञ्च कठिनं पुरुषोत्तम।

wath य नैवोक्तं मयात्र परमेश्वर।

तत्सर्वं त्वं नमस्तुभ्यं भूयो भूयो नमो AA Vw

I am of you, upheld by you; you are my
creator, and to you I fly for refuge: hence, in
this universe, Madhavi (the bride of Madhava
or Visnu) is my designation. Triumph to the
essence of all wisdom, to the unchangeable,
the imperishable: triumph to the eternal; to the
indiscreet, to the essence of discrete things: to
him who is both cause and effect; who is the
universe; the sinless lord of sacrifice; ‘triumph.
You are sacrifice; you are the oblation; you are
the mystic Omkara; you an the sacrificial fires;
you are the Vedas, and their dependent
science,; you are, Hari, the object of all
worship.’ The sun, the stars, the planets, the

whole world; ail that is formless, or that has
form; all that is visible, or invisible; all, Purus
ottama, that I have said, or left unsaid; all this,
Supreme, you are. Hail to you, again and
again! hail! all hail!
पराशर Sart

एवं संस्तूयमानस्तु पृथिव्या पृथिवीधर:।

सामस्वरध्वनि: श्रीमान् srt परिघर्घरम्।। २५॥

तत: समुत्झिप्य धरां स्वदंष्ररया

महावराह: स्फूढफ्द्मलोचन॰

सष्ठुत्थितोनीलइन्रग्धलोमहान्॥रदा।
उत्तिष्ठता तेन मुखानिलाहतं

तत्सम्भवाम्भो जनलोकसंश्रयात्।
प्रक्षालयामास fe तान् महाद्युतीन्

सनन्दनादीनपकल्पषान् मुनीन्।। २७॥
प्रयान्ति तोयानि क्षुराग्रविक्षते

रसातलेऽघ, कृतशब्दसन्तति:।
श्रासानिलास्ता: परत: प्रयान्ति

सिद्धा जने ये नियतं वसन्ति।। २८॥
उतिष्ठतस्तस्य जलार्द्रकुक्षे-

र्महावराहस्य wel विधार्य्य।
विधुन्वतो वेदमयं wit

रोमान्तरस्था मुनयो जुषन्ति।। २९॥

ties जने ये निवसन्ति योगिन:।
सनन्दनाद्या नतिनम्रकन्धरा
धराधरं घोरतरोद्भतेक्षणम्।। ३०

PardSara said—The auspicious supporter of
the world, being thus hymned by the earth,
emitted a low murmuring sound, like the
chanting of the Sama Veda; and the mighty
boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and
whose body, vast as the Nila mountain, was of
the dark colour of the lotus leaves, ‘uplifted
upon his ample tusks the earth from the lowest
regions. As he reared up his head, the waters
shed from his brow purified the great sages,
Sanandana and others, residing in the sphere
of the saints. Through the indentations made
by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower

तं
