128

प्रीतिमांश्चाभवत् तस्मिन्ननुतापी महासुर:।
गुरुपित्रोश्चकारैवं शुश्रूषां सोऽपि धर्म्मवित्॥३ en
पितर्थ्यपरतिं नीते नरसिंहस्वरूपिणा।

विष्णुना सोऽपि दैत्यानां मैत्रेयाभूत षतिस्तत:।। ३ २॥
ततो राज्यद्युतिं प्राप्य कर्म्मशुड्धिकरीं fast
पुत्रपौत्रांश्च सुबहूनवाप्यैश्चर्य्यमेव च।।३३॥
क्षीणाधिकार: स यदा पुण्यपापविवर्जित:।

तदासौ भगदद्घ्यानात् परे निर्वाणमाप्तवान्। ३४॥

Thus saying, Visnu vanished from his
sight, and Prahlada repaired to his father, and
bowed down before him. His father kissed him
on the forehead’, and embraced him, and shed
tears, and said, "Dost you live. my son?" And
the great Asura repented of his former cruelty,
and treated him with kindness: and Prahlada,
fulfilling his duties like any other youth,
continued diligent in the service of his
preceptor and his father. After his father had
been put to death by Visnu in the form of the
man-lion”. Prahlada became the sovereign of
the Daityas; and possessing the splendours of
royalty consequent upon his piety, exercised
extensive sway, and was blessed with a
numerous progeny. At the expiration of an
authority which was the reward of his
meritorious acts, he was freed-from the
consequences of moral merit or demerit, and
obtained, through meditation on the deity,
final exemption from existence.

एवम्प्रभावो दैत्योऽसौ मैत्रेयासीन्महामति:।
प्रह्लादो भगवद्भक्तो यं त्वं मामनुपृच्छसि॥ ३५॥
यस्त्वेतच्चरितं तस्य प्रह्लादस्य महात्मन:।
शृणोति wer पापानि wat गच्छन्ति संक्षयम्॥३६॥
अहोरात्रकृतं पापं प्रह्लादचरितं नर:।
श्वृण्वन् पठंश्च मैत्रेय व्यपोहति न संशय:॥ ३७॥
पौर्णमास्याममावस्यामष्टम्यामथवा wr
द्वादश्यां वा तदाप्नोति गोप्रदानफलं fae ३८॥
were सकलापत्सु यथा रक्षितवान् हरि:।
तथा clare यस्तस्य शृणोति चरितं सदा।। ३ ९॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे प्रथमांशे विंशोऽध्याय:

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Such, Maitreya, was the Daitya Prahlada,
the wise and faithful worshipper of Visnu, of
whom you wished to hear; and such was his
miraculous power. Whoever listens to the
history of Prahlada is immediately cleansed

. from his sins: the- iniquities that he commits,

by night or by day, shall be expiated by once
hearing, or once reading, the history of
Prahlada, The perusal of this histery on the
day of full moon, of new moon, or on the
eighth or twelfth day of the lunation, shall
yield fruit equal to the donation of a cow*. As
Visnu protected Prahlada in all the calamities
to which he was exposed, so shall the deity

protect him who listens constantly to The tale”.
KEK

NOTES

1. Literally, ‘having smelt his forehead.’ I have
elsewhere had had occasion to observe this practice
: Hindu Theatre. 11. 45.

2. Here is another instance of that brief reference
to popular and prior legends, which is frequent in
this Purina. The man-lion Avatara is referred to in
several of the Puranas, but I have met with the story
in detail only in the Bhagavata. It is there said that
Hiranyakagipu asks his son, why if Visnu is every
where, he is not visible in a pillar in the hall, where
they are assembled. He then rises, and strikes the
column with his first: on which Visnu, in a form
which is neither wholly a lion nor a man, issues
from it, and a conflict ensues, which ends in
Hiranyakasipu's being torn to pieces. Even this
account, therefore, is not in all particulars the same
as the popular version of the story.

3. The days of full and new moon are sacred
with all sects of Hindus : the eighth and twelfth
days of the lunar half month were considered holy
by the Vaisnavas, as appears from the text. The
eighth maintains its character in a great degree from
the eighth of Bhadra being the birthday of Krsna;
but the eleventh, in more recent Vaisnava works, as
the Brahma Vaivartta Purana, has taken the place of
the twelfth, and is even more sacred than the
eighth.

4. Or any solemn gift: that of a cow is held
particularly sacred; but it implies accompaniments
of a more costly character, ornaments and gold.
