448

for, having witnessed thy power, we cannot
believe you to be a man. Thy affection,
KeSava, for our women and children, and for
Vraja; the deeds that you hast wrought, which
all the gods would have attempted in vain;

they boyhood, and thy prowess; thy
humiliating birth amongst us; are
contradictions that fill us with doubt,

whenever we think of them. Yet reverence be
to you whether you be a god, or a demon, or a
Gandharva, or whatever we may deem you;
for you are our friend.”

पराशर उवाच
क्षणं भूत्वा त्वसौ तूष्णीं किञ्चित् प्रणयकोपवान्।
इत्येवमुक्तस्तैर्गोपि: कृष्णोऽप्याह महामुने।। ९॥

When they had cndcd, Krsna remained
silent for some time, as if hurt and offended,
and then replied to them,

श्रीभगवानुवाच
मत्सम्बन्धेन भो गोपा! यदि लज्जा न जायते।
श्लोध्यो वाहं aa: fae at विचारेण प्रयोजनम्।। १०॥
यदि वोऽस्मि मयि प्रीति: श्लाघ्योऽहं भवतां यदि।
तदात्मबन्धुसदृशी बुद्धिर्व: क्रियतां मयि। een

नाहं देवी न गन्धर्वो न यक्षो न च दानव:।
अहं वो बान्धवो जातो नास्ति चिन्त्यमतोऽन्यथा।। १२॥
Krsna replied— ‘Herdsmen, if you are not
ashamed of my relationship; if 1 have merited
your praise; what occasion is there for you to
engage in any discussion concerning me? If
yon have any regard for me; if I have deserved
your praise; thcn be satisfied to know that 1
am your kinsman. I am neither god, nor Yaksa,
nor Gandharva, nor Danava; | have been born
your relative, and you must not think
differently of me.’
पराशरं उवाच
इति श्रुत्वा हरेवाक्यं बद्धमौनास्ततो वनम्।
ययुर्गोपा महाभाग। तस्मिन प्रणयकोपिन।। १३॥
Upon receiving this answer, the Gopas held

their peace, and went into the woods, Icaving
Krsna apparently displeased.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

कृष्णस्तु विमलं व्योम शरच्चन्द्रस्य चन्दरिकाम्।

तथा कुमुदिनीं फुल्लामामोदितदिगन्तराम् ॥ १४॥

SRI तथा Has भृङ्गमाला मनोरमाम्।

विलोक्य Ge गोपीभिर्मनश्चक्रे रति प्रति।। १५॥

सह रामेण मधुरमतीव वनिताप्रियम्।

जगौ कलपदं शौरिर्नानातन्त्री-कृतव्रतम्।। १६॥

आजग्मुस्त्वरिता गोप्यो TATA मधुसूदन:।। १७॥

But Krsna, observing the clear sky bright
with the autumnal moon, and the air perfumed
with the fragrance of the wild water-lily, in
whose buds the clustering bees were
murmuring their songs, felt inclined to join
with the Gopis in sport. Accordingly he and
Raima commenced singing sweet low strains in
various measures, such as the women loved;
and they, aS soon as they heard the melody,

quitted their homes, and hastened to meet the
foe of Madhu.

शनै: PAM गोपी काचित् तस्य लयानुगम्।
दत्तावधाना काचित्तु तमेव मनसास्मरत्।। १८॥
काचित् कृष्णेति कृष्णेति प्रोक्त्वा लज्जामुपागता।
ययो च काचित् प्रेमान्धा तत्पार्श्वमविलज्जिता।। १९॥
काचिदावसशस्यान्त: स्थिता quar बहिर्गुरून्।
तन्मयत्वेन गोविन्दं दध्यौ मीलितलोचना।। २०॥
तच्चिनताविपुलाह्लाद-क्षीणपुष्यचया तथा।
तदप्राप्ति-महादु:खविलीनाशेषपातका।। २१॥
चिन्तयन्ती जगत्सूति परब्रह्मस्वरूपिणम्।
निरुच्छ्वासतया मुक्तिं गतान्या गोपकन्यका।। २२॥

One damsel gently sang an accompaniment
to his song; another attentively listened to his
melody: one calling out upon his name, then
shrunk abashed; whilst another, more bold,
and instigated by affection, pressed close to
his side: one, as she sallied forth, beheld some
of the seniors of the family, and dared not
venture, contenting herself with meditating on
Krsna with closed eyes, and entire devotion,
by which immediately all acts of merit were
effaced by rapture, and all sin was expiated by
