142

appointed Dyutimat to rule over Krauiica-
dvipa; Bhavya to reign over Saka-dvipa; and
Savala he nominated the monarch of the Dvipa
of Puskara.

जम्बूद्वीपेश्वरो यस्तु अग्नीघ्रो मुनिसत्तम।

तस्य पुत्रा बभुवुस्ते प्रजापितसमा Fan १६॥
नाभि: किम्पुरुषश्चैव हरिवर्ष इलावृत:।

रम्यो हिरण्वान् षष्ठश्च कुरुर्भद्राश्च एव च।। १७॥
केतुमालस्तथैवान्य: साधुचेष्टो नृपोऽभवत्।

Agnidhra, the king of Jambu-Dvipa. had
nine sons, equal in splendour to the patriarchs:
they were named Nabhi, Kimpurusa,
Hariramvarsa. Ilavrta, Ramya, Himvat, Kuru,
Bhadrasva, and Ketumiala.* who was a prince
ever active in the practice of piety.

जम्बूद्वीपविभागांश्च तेषां विप्र निशामय।। १८॥
frat दत्तं हिमाह्नन्तु ad नाभेस्तु दक्षिणम्।
हेमकूटं तथा at ददौ किम्पुरुषाय स:।। १९॥
तृतीयं नैषधं at हरिवर्षाय दत्तवान्।

इलावृताय Weal WHIT तु WAT २०॥
नीलाचलाश्रितं वर्षं रम्याय प्रददौ पिता।

श्वेतं तदुत्तरं वर्षं पित्रा दत्तं हिरण्वते।। २ eH
यदुत्तरं शृङ्गवतो वर्ष तत् कुरवे ददौ।

At: पूर्वेण यद् वर्षं भद्राश्चाय प्रदत्तवान्।। २२॥
गन्धमादनवर्षन्तु केतुमालाय दत्तवान्।

इत्येतानि ददौ तेभ्य: पुत्रेभ्य: स नरेश्वर:।। २३॥
वर्षेष्वेतेषु ar पुत्रानभिषिच्य स भूमिप:।
शालग्रामं महापुण्यं मैत्रेय तपसे ययौ।। २४॥

Hear next, Maitreya, in what manner
Agnidhra apportioned Jambu-Dvipa amongst
his nine sons. He gave to Nabhi the country
called Hima, south of the Himavat, or snowy
mountains. The country of Hemakita he gave
to Kimpurusa; and to Harivarsa, the country of
Nisadha. The region in the centre of which
mount Meru is situated he conferred on
llavrta; and to Ramya, the countries lying
between it and the Nila mountain. To Hiranvat

his father gave the country lying to the north
of it, called Sveta; and on the north of the

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Sveta mountains, the country bounded by the
Sringavan range he gave to Kuru. The
countries on the east of Meru he assigned to
Bhadrasva; and Gandhmadana, which lay west
of it, he gave to Ketumiala.” Having installed
his sons sovereigns in these several regions,
the pious king Agnidhra retired to a life of
penance at the holy place of pilgrimage,
Salagrama.°

यानि किम्पुरुषादीनि वर्षाण्यष्टौ महामुने।

asi स्वाभाविकी सिद्धि: सुखप्राया ह्ययत्नत:।। २५॥
विपर्ययो न तेष्वस्ति जरामृत्युभयं न च।

धर्माधर्मैनि तेष्वास्तां नोत्तमाधममध्यमा:।॥ २६॥

न तेष्वस्ति युगावस्था क्षेत्रेष्वष्टासु सर्वदा।

The eight Varsas, or countries, Kimpurusa
and the rest, are places of perfect enjoyment,
where happiness is spontaneous and
uninterrupted. In them there is no vicissitude,
not the dread of decrepitude or death: there is
no distinction of virtue or vice, nor difference
of degree as better or worse, nor any of the
effects produced in this region by the
revolutions of ages.

हिमाह्निं यस्य वै af नाभेरासीन्महात्मन:॥ २७॥

तस्यर्षभोऽभवत् पुत्रो मेरुदेव्यां महाद्युति:।
OIG भरतो जज्ञे SAG: पुत्रशतस्य il २८॥
कृत्वा राज्यं स्वधर्मेण wap विविधान् मखान्।

अभिषिच्य सुतं ज्येष्ठं भरतं पृथिवीपतिम्।। २९॥
तपसे स महाभाग: पुलस्त्यस्याश्रमं ययौ।
वानप्रस्थविधानेन तत्रापि कृतनिश्चय:।। ३ ot

तपस्तेषे यथान्यायं यदा च स महीपति:।
तपसा कर्शितोऽत्यर्थं कृशो धमनिसन्तत:॥ ३ १॥
नग्नो वीटां मुखे दत्त्वा वीराध्वानं ततो गत:।

Ta भारतं वर्षमेतल्लोकेषु गीयते। ३ २॥
भरताय aa: पित्रा दत्तं प्रातिष्ठता वनम्।

Nabhi, who had for his portion the country
of Himahwa. bad by his queen Meru the
magnanimous Rsabha; and he had a hundred
sons, the eldest of whom was Bharata. Rsabha
having ruled with equity and wisdom, and
celebrated many sacrificial rites, resigned the
