३98 THE VISNU-PURANAM
दृष्टवा ममत्वादृतचित्तमेकं तस्य पापमशेषं वै प्रणश्यत्यमलात्मन:।॥६६॥
विहाय मां मृत्युपथं व्रजन्तम्। धनधान्यद्धिमतुला प्राप्नोत्यव्याहतेन्द्रिय:।
तस्यान्वस्थस्य कथं ममत्वं श्रुत्वैवमखिलं वंशं प्रशस्तं शशिसूर्ययो:।। ६७॥

हृद्यास्पदं मत्प्रभवं करोति।। ६ २॥

It is through infatuation that kings desire to
possess me, whom their predecessors have
been forced to leave, whom their fathers have
not retained. Beguiled by the sclfish love of
sway, fathers contend with sons and brothers
with brothers, for my possession. Foolishness
has been the character of every king who has
boasted, ‘All this earth is mine-everything is
mine~it will be in my house for ever;’ for he is
dead. How is it possible that such vain desires
should survive in the hearts of his descendants,
who have seen their progenitor, absorbed by
the thirst of dominion, compelled to relinquish
me, whom he called his own and tread the path
of dissolution?

पृथ्वी ममैषाशु परित्यजैनां वदन्ति ये दूतमुखै: स्वशत्रुम्।
नराधिपास्तेषु ममातिहास: पुनश्च मूढेषु
दयाभ्युपैति।। ६३॥

When I hear a king sending word to
another by his ambassador, ‘This earth is
mine; immediately resign your pretensions to
it;’ I am moved to violent laughter at first, but
it soon subsides in pity for the infatuated fool.”

पराशर उवाच

इत्येते धरणीगीता श्लोका मैत्रैय! यै: श्रुता:।

ममत्वं विलयं याति तापन्यस्तं यथा हिमम्।। ६४॥

इत्येष कथित: सम्यङ् मनोर्वशो war तव।

यत्र स्थितिप्रवृत्तस्य विष्णोरंशांशका नृपा:॥६५॥

These were the verses, Maitreya, which

Earth recited and by listening to which
ambition fades away like snow before the sun.
1 have now related to you the whole account of
the descendants of the Manu; amongst whom
have flourished kings endowed with a portion

of Visnu, engaged in the preservation of the
earth.

शृणुयाद् य इमं भक्त्या मनुवंशमनुक्रमात्।

ययाति-नहुषाद्यांश्च ज्ञात्वा निष्ठामुपागतान्।
महाबलान् महावीर्य्यनन्तधनसञ्चयान्॥ ६ ८॥
कृतान् कालेन बलिना कथाशेषान् नराधिपान्।
श्रुत्वा न पुत्रदारादौ गृहक्षेत्रादिके तथा।
द्रव्यादौ च कृतप्रज्ञो ममत्वं कुरुते नर:।। ६९॥

Whoever shall listen reverently and with
faith to this narrative, proceeding from the
posterity of Manu, shali be purified entirely
from all his sins and, with the perfect
possession of his faculties, shall live in
unequalled affluence, plenty and prosperity.
He who has heard of the races of the sun and
moon, of Iksvaku, Jahnu, Mandhatri, Sagara
and Raghu, who have all perished; of Yayati,
Nahusa and their posterity, who are no more;
of kings of great might, resistless valour and
unbounded wealth, who have been overcome
by still more powerful time and are now only a
tale; he will learn wisdom and forbear to call
either children or wife or house or lands or
wealth, his own.

रुद्बाहुभिर्वर्षगणाननेकान्।
इष्टाश्च यज्ञा बलिनोऽतिवीर्य्य:
कृतास्तु कालेन कथावशेषा:।।७०॥

The arduous penances that have been
performed by heroic men obstructing fate for
countless years, religions rites and sacrifices
of great efficacy and virtue, have been made
by time the subject only of narration.

पृथु: समस्तान् प्रचचार लोका-
नव्याहतो योऽरिविदारिचक्र!
स कालवाताभिहतो विनष्ट:
क्षिप्तं यथा शाल्मलितूलमग्नौ॥७१॥

The. valiant Prthu traversed the universe,
every where triumphant over his foes; yet he
