420

THE VISNU-PURANAM

several embryos into the womb of Devaki! and
transfcrred the seventh after a season to that of
Rohini; after which, Hari, for the benefit of the
three regions, became incarnate as_ the
conception of the former princess and
Yoganidra as that of YaSoda, exactly as the
supreme Visnu had commanded. When the
portion of Visnu had become incorporate upon
earth, the planetary bodies moved in brilliant
order in the hcavens and the seasons were
regular and genial. No person could bear to
gaze upon Devaki, from the light that invested
her; and those who contemplated her radiance
felt thcir minds disturbed. The gods, invisible
to mortals, celebrated her praises continually
from the time that Visnu was contained in her
person.

देवता ऊचु:
प्रकृतिस्त्वं परा सूक्ष्मा ब्रह्मगर्भाभव: पुरा।
ततो वाणी जगद्धातुर्वेदगर्भासि शोभने।।७॥
सूर्यस्वरूपगर्भासि सृष्टिभूता सनातनि।
बीजभूता तु सर्वस्य यज्ञभूताभवस्त्रयी।। 11
erm त्वमेवेज्या वह्निगर्भा aarti:
अदितिर्देवगर्भा त्वं दैत्यगर्भा तथा दिति:।। ९॥

**You,’’ said the divinities, "are that
Prakrti, infinite and subtle, which formerly
bore Brahma in its womb : then was you the
goddess of speech, the energy of the creator of
the universe and the parent of the Vedas. You,
eternal being, comprising in your substance
the essence of all created things, was identical
with creation : you was the parent of the
triform sacrificc, becoming the germ of all
things: you are sacrifice, whence all fruit
proceeds: you are the wood, whose attrition
engenders fire. As Aditi, you are the parent of
the gods; as Diti, you are the mother of the
Daityas, their foes.

ज्योत्स्ना वासरगर्भा त्वं ज्ञानगर्भासि सन्नति:।
नयगर्भा परा नीतिर्लज्रा त्वं WARM १०॥
कामगर्भा तथेच्छा त्वं तुष्टि: सन्तोषगर्भिणी।

मेधा च बोधगर्भासि धैर्यगर्भोद्वहा धृति:।॥ ११॥

ग्रहर्क्षतारकागर्भा द्यौरस्यखिलहैतुकी।

एता विभूतयो Sf! तथान्याश्च सहस्रश:॥ १२॥
तथासङ्घषया जगद्धात्रि! साम्प्रतं जठरे तव।
समुद्रादि-नदी-द्वीप-वन पत्तनभूषणा।। १३॥
ग्राम-खर्वट-खैटाढ्या समस्ता पृथिवी शुभे।
समस्तवह्नयोऽम्भांसि सकलाश्च समीरणा:॥ १४॥
अरहर्क्षतारकाचित्रं विमानशतसङ्कुलम्।
अवकाशमशेषस्य यद्ददातिनभ: स्थलम्।। १५॥
भूर्लोकश्च भुवलेक: स्वर्लोकोऽथ महर्जन:।
तपश्च ब्रह्मलोकश्च ब्रह्माण्डमखिलं YN १६॥
तदन्तरे स्थिता देवा दैत्य-गर्व-चारणा:।
महोरगास्तथा यक्षा राक्षसा: प्रेतगुह्यका:।। १७॥
AIA: पशवश्चान्ये ये च जीवा यशस्विनि।
तैरन्त: स्थैरनन्तोऽसौ सर्वेश: सर्वभावना:॥१८॥
रूपकर्मस्वरूपाणि न परिच्छेदगोचरे।
यस्याखिलप्रमाणानि स विष्णुगर्भगस्त्व।। १९॥

You are light, whence day is begotten : you
are humility, the mother of true wisdom : you
are kingly policy, the parent of order : you are
modesty, the progenitrix of affection: you are
desire, of whom love is born : you are
contentment, whence resignation is derived:
you are intelligence, the mother of knowledge:
you are patience, the parent of fortitude-: you
are the heavens and your children are the stars:
and from you does all that exists proceed.
Such, goddess and thousands more, are your
mighty faculties; and now innumerable are the
contents of your womb, O mother of the
universe. The whole earth, decoratcd with
oceans, rivers, continents, cities, villages,
hamlets and towns; all the fires, waters and
winds; the stars, asterisms and planets; the
sky, crowded with the variegated chariots of
the gods and ether, that provides space for all
substance; the several spheres of earth, sky
and heaven; of saints, sages, ascetics and of
Brahma; the whole egg of Brahma, with all its
population of gods, demons, spirits, snake-
gods, fiends, ghosts and imps, men and
animals and whatever creatures have life,
