BOOK IV, 24

399

was blown away, like the light down of the
Simal tree, before the blast of time.

a: alata बुभूजे समस्तान्
द्वीपान् समाक्रम्य हतारिचक्र:।
स एव सङ्गल्पविकल्पहेतु:।॥७२॥

He who was Kartavirya subdued
innumerable enemies and conquered the seven
zones of the earth; but now he is only the topic
of a theme, a subject for affirmation and
contradiction.*®

मैश्वर्य्यमुद्भासितदिङ्मुखानाम्।
भस्मापि जातं न कथं क्षणेन
म्रूभङ्गपातेन धिगन्तकस्य।। ७३॥

Fie upon the empire of the sons of Raghu,
who triumphed over Dasanana and extended
their sway to the ends of the earth; for was it
not consumed in an instant by the frown of the
destroyer?

कथाशरीरत्वमवाप ag वै
मान्धातॄनामा भुवि चक्रवर्ती।

श्रुत्वापि तं कोऽपि करोति साधु-
मर्मत्वमात्मन्यपि मन्दचेता:।। ७४॥

Mandhata, the emperor of the universe, is
embodied only in a legend; and what pious
man who hears it will ever be so unwise as to
cherish the desire of possession in his soul?

भगीरथाद्या: सगर: ककुत्स्थो
दशाननो राघव लक्ष्मणौ च।
युधिष्ठिराद्याश्च बभूवुरेते
सत्यं न मिथ्या क्व नु ते न विद्य:।।७५॥
Bhagiratha, Sagara, Kakutstha, Dasanana,
Rama, Laksmana, Yudhisthira and others,

have been. Is it so? Have they ever really
existed? Where are they now? we know not!

ये aad ये च नृपा भविष्या:

प्रोक्ता मया विप्रवरोग्रवीर्य्य:।
ये ते तथान्ये च तथाभिधेया:

wa भविष्यन्ति यथैव पूर्वे॥७६॥

The powerful kings who now are or who
will be, as I have related them to you or any
others who are unspecified, are all subject to
the same fate and the present and the future
will perish and be forgotten, like their
predecessors.

wag विदित्वा न नरेण ard
ममत्वमात्मन्यपि पण्डितेन।

तिष्ठन्तु तावत् तनयात्मजाद्या:
क्षेत्रादयो ये तु शरीरतोऽन्ये।। ७७॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे चतुर्थांशे चतुविंश: अध्याय:।।

Aware of this truth, a wise man will never
be influenced by the principle of individual
appropriation; and regarding them as only
transient and temporal possessions, he will not
consider children and posterity, lands and
property or whatever else is personal, to be his
own.

NOTES

1. Munika, Vayu
Bhagavata.

2. For 23 years, V. and M.

3. 24 years V.; Tilaka or Balaka, 28, M.

4. 50 years V.; 53, M.

5. Ajaka, 21 years V.; Siiryaka, 21, M.; Rajaka,
Bhagavata.

6. 20 years V. and M.

7. This number is also specified by the Vayu and
Bhagavata and the several years of the reigns of the
former agree with the total. The particulars of the
Matsya compose 145 years, but there is no doubt
some mistake in them.

8. Sisundka, who according to the Vayu and
Matsya relinquished Banarasa to his son and
established himself at Girivraja or Rajgrha in Bihar,
reigns 40 years V. and M.

9. 36 years V. and M.

10. Ksemakarman, 20 years V.; Ksemadharman,
36, M.

11. 40 years V.; Ksemajit or Ksemarcis, 36, M.;
Ksetrajfia, Bhagavata.

12. Vimbisara, 28 years V.; Vindusena or
Vindhyasena, 28, M.; Vidhisara, Bhagavata.

13. 25 years V.; 27, M.; but the latter inserts a
Kanvayana, 9 years and Bhimimitra or

: Pulika, Matsya; Sunaka,
