BOOK ITI, CHAP. 13

vat: क्रिया मध्यमाश्च तथा चैवोत्तरा: क्रिया:।
त्रिप्रकारा: क्रिया: सर्वास्तासां भेदं शृणुष्व W330
आदाह-वार्यायुधादिस्पर्शाद्यन्तास्तु या: क्रिया:।
ता: पूर्वा मध्यमा मासि मास्येकोद्दिष्टसंज्ञिता:॥३४॥

प्रेते पितॄत्वमापन्ने सपिण्डीकरणादनु।
क्रियन्ते at: क्रिया: पित्र्या: प्रोच्यन्ते ता नृपोत्तरा:। ३५

पितृमातृपिण्डैस्तु समानसलिलैस्तथा।
तत् सङ्घान्तर्गतैर्वापि राज्ञा तद्धनहारिणा॥ ३६॥

Obsequial rites are of three descriptions,
initiative, intermediate and subsequent. The
first are those which are observed after the
burning of the corpse until the touching of
water, weapons (or until the cessation of
uncleanness). The intermediate ceremonies are
the Sraddhas called Ekoddista, which are
offered every month: and the subsequent rites
are those which follow the Sapindikarana,
when the deceased is admittcd amongst the
ancestors of his race; and the ceremonies are
thenceforth general or ancestral. The first set
of rites (as essential) are to be performed by
the kindred. of the father or mother, whether
connected by the offering of the cake or of
water, by the associates of the deceased or by
the prince who inherits his property.

yal: क्रियाश्च कर्तव्या: पुत्राद्यैरेव चोत्तरा:।
दौहित्रैर्वा नृपश्रेष्ठ ! कार्यास्तत्तनयैस्तथा।॥। ३७॥
भृताहनि च कर्तव्या: स्त्रीणामप्युत्तरा: क्रिया:।
प्रतिसंवत्सरं राजन्नेकोद्दिष्टविधानत:॥ ३ ८॥
तस्मादुत्तरसंज्ञा या: क्रियास्ता: शृणु पार्थिव!

चदा यदा च कर्तव्या विघिना येन AAT 3 ९॥
इति श्रीविष्णुषुराणे तृतीयांऽशे त्रयोदशोऽध्याय:।। १३॥

The first and the last rites are both to be
performed by sons and other relations and by
daughter's sons and their sons; and so are the
sacrifices on the day of the person's death. The
last class or ancestral rites, are to be performed
annually, with the same ceremonies as are
enjoined for the monthly obsequies; and they
may be also pertained by females. As the
ancestral rights are therefore most universal, I

273
will describe to you, oh king, at what seasons
and in what manner, they should be
celebrated."

NOTES

1. The offerings of the Hindus to the Pitrs
partake of the character of those of the Romans to
the lares and manes, but bear a more conspicuous
part in their ritual. They are said indeed by Manu
(II. 203), in words repeated in the Vayu and
Matsya Puranas and Hari Varnsa, to be of more
moment than the worship of the gods : taaratefi सदा
पितृकार्य्य विशिष्यते। These ceremonies are not to be
regarded as merely obsequial; for independently of
the rites addressed to a recently deceased relative
and in connection with him to remote ancestors and
to the progenitors of all beings, which are of a
strictly obsequial or funereal description, offerings
to deceased ancestors and the Pitrs in’ general, form
an essential ceremony on a great variety of festive
and domestic occasions. The Nimaya Sindhu, in a
passage referred to by Colebrooke (As. Res. VII.)
specifies the following Sraddhas : 1. The Nitya or
perpetual; daily offerings to ancestors in general; 2.
The Naimittika or occasional; as the Ekoddista or
obsequial offerings on account of a kinsman
recently deceased; 3. The Kamya, voluntary;
performed for the accomplishment of a special
design (अभिप्रतेसिद्धये), 4. The Vrddhi; performed on
occasions of rejoicing or prosperity; 5. The
Sapindana; offerings to all individual and to general
ancestors; 6. The Parvana Sraddha; offerings to the
manes on certain lunar days called Parvas or day of
full moon and new moon and the eighth and
fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight; 7. The Gost
hi; for the advantage of a number of learned
persons or of an assembly of Brahmanas, invited
for the purpose; 8. The Suddhi; one performed to
purify a person from some defilement; an expiatory
Sraddha; 9. The Karmanga; one forming part of the
intiatory ceremonies or Sanskaras, observed at
conception, birth, tonsure; 10. The Daiva; to which
the gods are invited; 11. The Yatra Sraddha; held
by a person going a journey; and 12. The Pusti
Sraddha; one performed to promote health and
wealth. Of these, the four which are considered the
most solemn are the rite performed for a parent or
near relative, lately deceased; that which is
performed for kindred collectively: that observed
