BOOK J, CHAP. 14

प्रचेतस: समुद्राम्भस्येतदाख्यातुमर्हसि। ८॥

Maitreya said—-You can inform me, great
sage, why the magnanimous Pracetasas
engaged in penance in the waters of the sea.

पराशरं उवाच

पित्रा प्रचेतस: प्रोक्ता प्रजार्थं ममितात्मना।

प्रजापतिनियुक्तेन बहुमानपुर:सरम्॥९॥
प्राचीनबर्हिरुवाच

ब्रह्मणा देवदेवेन समादिष्टोऽस्म्यहं सुता:।

प्रजा: संवर्द्धनीयास्ते मया चोक्तं तथेति तत्।। १०॥

तन्मम पीयते wat: प्रजावृद्धिमतन्दिता:।

कृरुध्वं माननीया व: समाज्ञा च प्रजापते:।। ११॥

ParasSara said—-The sons of Pracinaverhis
were originally informed by their father, who
had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose
mind was intent on multiplying mankind, that
he had been respectfully enjoined by Brahma,
the god of gods, to labour to this end, and that
he had promised obedience : “now therefore,”
continued he. “‘do you, my sons, to oblige me,
diligently promote the increase of the people,

for the orders of the father of all creatures are
entitled to respect.”

तथेत्युक्त्वा तु तं भूय: पप्रच्छु: पितरं मुने॥१२॥
प्रचेतस ऊचु:
येन wet प्रजावृद्धौ समर्था: कर्म्मणा वयम्।

भवामस्तत् समस्तं A: कर्म्म व्याख्यातुमर्हसि।। १३॥

The sons of the king, having heard their
father's words, replied, "So be it;” but they
then inquired of him, as he could best explain
it, by what means they might accomplish the
augmentation of mankind.

समेति नान्यथा wed: किमन्यत कथयामि व:॥ १४॥
तस्मात् प्रजाविवृद्ध्यर्थं सर्वभूतप्रभुं हरिम्।
आराधयत गोविन्दं यदि सिद्धिमभीप्सथ।। १५॥

89

धर्म्ममर्थञ्च कामञ्च मोक्षञ्चान्विच्छता सदा।

आराधनीयो भगवान् अनादि: पुरुषोत्तम:।। १६॥

यस्मिनाराधिते सर्गं चकारादौ प्रजापति:।

तमाराध्याच्युतं afe: प्रजानां वो भविष्यति।। १७॥

He said to them: "Whoever worships
Visnu, the bestower of good, attains
undoubtedly the object of his desires: there is
no other mode. What Further can I tell you ?
Adore therefore Govinda, who is Hari. the lord
of all beings, in order to effect the increase of
the human race, if you wish to succeed. The
eternal Purusottama is to be propitiated by him
who wishes for virtue, wealth, enjoyment or
liberation. Adore him, the imperishable, by
whom. when propitiated, the world was first
created, and mankind will assuredly be
multiplied.”

TU उवाच

इत्येवमुक्तास्ते पित्रा Yat प्रचेतसो दश।

Wer: पयोधिसलिले तपस्तेपु: समाहिता।। १८॥
दशवर्षसहस्राणि न्यस्तचित्ता जगत्पतौ।

नारायणे मुनिश्रेष्ठ सर्वलोकपरायणे।। १९॥

waa ते स्थिता देवमेकाग्रमनसो हरिम्।

eas स्तुत: कामान् स्तोतुरिष्टान् प्रयच्छति। २०॥

Parasara said— Thus instructed by their
father, the ten Pracetasas plunged into the
depths of the ocean, and with minds wholly
devoted to Narayana, the sovereign of the
universe, who is beyond all worlds, were
engrossed by religious . austerity for ten
thousand years: remaining there, they with
fixed thoughts praised Hari, who. when
propitiated, confers on those who praise him
all that they. desire.

मैत्रेय sara
स्तवं प्रचेतसो विष्णो: समुद्राम्भसि संस्थिता:।
चक्रुस्तन्मे मुनिश्रेष्ठ सुपुण्यं वक्तुमर्हसि।। 2 a
Maitreya said—The excellent praises that
the Pracetasas addressed to Visnu, whilst they

stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are
qualified to repeat to me.
