BOOK Il, CHAP. 16

Brahmana said— “When Nidagha heard
these words, he immediately fell at the feet of
the stranger, and said, ‘Of a surety you are my
saintly preeeptor Rbhu; the mind of no other
person is so fully imbued with the doetrines of
unity as that of my teaeher, and hence I know
that you are he.” To this Rbhu replied, ‘I am
your preeeptor, by name Rbhu, who, pleased
with the dutiful attention he has reeeived, has
come to Nidagha to give him instruetion: for
this purpose have I briefly intimated to you
divine truth, the essenee of which is the non-
duality of all.’

ब्राह्मण उवाच
एवमुक्त्वा ययौ fag निदाघं स ऋभुर्गुरु:।
निदाघोऽप्युपदेशेन तेनाद्वैतपरोऽभवत्।। १९॥
सर्वमूतान्यभेदेन ददृशे स तदात्मन:।

यथा ब्रह्मपरो मुक्तिमवाप परमां द्विज।। २०॥

तथा त्वमपि eta! तुल्यात्मरिपुवान्धव:।

भव सर्वगतं जानन्नात्मानमवनीपते।। २ १॥|
भ्रान्तिदृष्टिभिरात्मापि तथैकं सन् पृथक पृथक्।। २२॥

Having thus spoken to Nidagha, the
Bréahmana Rbhu went away, leaving his
diseiple profoundly impressed, by his
instruetions, with belief in unity. He beheld all
beings theneeforth as the same with himself,
and, perfect in holy knowledge, obtained final
liberation. “In like manner do you, oh king,
who knows what duty is, regarding equally
friend or foe, consider yourself as one with all
that exists in the world. Even as the same sky
is apparently diversified as white or blue, so
Soul, whieh is in truth but one, appears to
erroneous Vision distinet in different persons.

तदच्युतो नास्ति परं ततोन्यत्।

सोऽहं स च त्वं स च सर्वमेत-
दात्मस्वरूपं त्यज भेदमोहम्।। २३॥

That One, whieh here is all things, is
Aehyuta (Visnu); than whom there is none
other. He is I; he is thou; he is all: this
universe is his form. Abandon the error of
distinction.”
पराशर उवाच

इतीरितस्तेन स राजवर्य्य-
स्तत्याज भेदं परमार्धदृष्टि:।

स चापि जातिस्मरणाप्तबोध-
स्तत्रैव जन्मन्यपवर्गमाप।। २४॥

इति भरत-नरेन्द्रसारवत्तं
कथयति यश्च शृणोति भक्तियुक्त:।

स विमलमतिरेति नात्मकोहं
भवपति च संसरणेषु मुक्तियोग्य:।। २५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे द्वितीयांशे षोडशोऽध्याय:।

PayvaSara resuned— The king, being thus
instrueted, opened his cyes to truth, and
abandoned the notion of distinct existenee:
whilst the Brahmana, who, through the
recoliection of his former lives, had acquired
perfeet knowledge, obtained now exemption
from future birth. Whoever narrates or listens
to the lessons ineulcated in the dialogue
between Bharata and the king, has his mind
enlightened, mistakes not the nature of
individuality, and the eourse cf his migrations

becomes fitted for ultimate emancipation.’
ak ok

NOTES

1. This legend is a good specimen of a sectarial
graft upon a Pauranik stem. It is in a great measure
peculiar to the Visnu P., as although it occurs also
in the Bhagavata, it is narrated there in a much
more concise manner, and in a strain that looks like
an abridgment of our ncxt.

END OF THE SECOND BOOK
