BOOK V, CHAP. 30

495

a: स्वधर्म्मपरैर्नाथ।! नरैराराधितो war
ते तरन्यखिललामेतां मायामात्मविमुक्तये।। १६॥

ब्रह्माद्या: सकला देवा मनुष्या: पशस्तथा।

विष्णुमायासहावर्त्तमोहान्धतमसावृता:।॥ १७॥

The notions that “I am—this is mine,” which
influence mankind, are but the delusions of the
mother of the world, originating in thy active
agency. Those men who, attentive to their
duties, diligently worship you, traverse all this
illusion, and obtain spiritual freedom, Brahma
and all the gods, men and animals, are alike
invested by the thick darkness of, fascination,
in the gulf of the illusions of Visnu.

आराध्य त्वामभीप्सन्ते कामानात्ममवक्षयम्।

यदेये पुरुषा माया सैवेयं भगवंस्तव॥ १८॥

मया त्वं पुत्रकामिन्या वैरिपक्षक्षयाय च।
आराधितो न मोक्षाय मायाविलसितं हि तत्।। १९॥
कौपीनाच्छादनप्राया वाच्छा कल्पट्टुमादपि।

जायते यदपुण्याना सोऽपराध: स्वदोषज:॥ २०॥
तत् प्रसीदखिलजगन्मायामोहकराव्यय।

अज्ञानं ज्ञानसद्भावभूतं भूतेश! नाशय।। २१॥

That men, who having worshipped you,
should seek the gratification of their desires,
and their own preservation, this, O lord, is also
thy delusion. It is the sport of thy fascinations,
that induces men to glorify you, to obtain
thereby the continuance of their race, or the
annihilation of their enemies, instead of
eternal liberation. It is the fault of the impure
acts of the unrighteous (to proffer such idle
requests to one able to confer much more
important benefits), like asking for a rag to
cover one's nakedness from the tree that
bestows whatever is solicited. Be propitious
then, imperishable author of all the error that
deceives the world; and dispel, O lord of all
creatures, the conceit of knowledge, which
proceeds from ignorance.

नमस्ते चक्रहस्ताय शाङ्गंहस्ताय ते नम:।
गदाहस्ताय ते विष्णो। शङ्खहस्ताय ते नम:।। २२॥
एतत् पश्यामि ते रूपं स्थूलचिह्नोपलक्षितम्।

न जानामि परं aa wale परमेश्वर।। २३॥

Glory to you, grasper of the discus, wielder
of the bow brandisher of the mace, holder of
the shell; for such do I behold you in thy
perceptible form: nor do I know that form of
your, which is beyond perception ! Have
compassion on me, supreme god.”

WIP उवाच
अदित्यैवं स्तुतो विष्णु: प्रहस्याह सुरारणिम्।
माता देवि! त्वमस्माकं प्रसीद वरदा Ta २४॥
Visnu, thus hymned by Aditi, smiled, and
said to the mother of the gods, “Mother

goddess, do you show favour unto me, and
grant me thy blessing.”

अदितिरुवाच
एवमस्तु यथेच्छा ते त्वमशेषै: सुरासुरै:।
अजेय: पुरुषव्याघ्र: | Pelee भविष्यसि।। २५॥
“So be it,” replied Aditi, “ever as you will;
and whilst you dwell amongst mortals, the first

of men, you shall be invincible by gods or
demons."

पराशर उवाच
ततोऽनन्तरमेवास्य शक्राणीसहितादितिम्।
सत्यभामा प्रणम्याह प्रसीदेति एन: पुन:।। २६॥
अदितिरुवाच

मत्प्रसादान्न ते सुभ्रु! जरा वैरूप्यमेव च।
भविष्यत्यनवद्याङ्गि! सुस्थिरं नवयौवनम्॥ २७॥

ParaSara said~ Then. Satyabhamé,
accompained by the queen of Indra, addressed
Aditi respectfully, and _ solicited her

benedictions: and Aditi in reply said to her,
"Fair-browed dame, you shall never suffer
decay, nor loss of beauty: you shall be the
asylum of all loveliness, dame of faultless
shade."

WU उवाच
अदित्या तु कृतानुज्ञो देवराजो जनार्द्दनम्।

यथावत् पूजयामास बहुमानपुर:सरम्॥ २८॥
शची त सत्यभामायै पारिजातस्य पुष्पकम्।
