92

of having obtained from Indra the power of making
himself invisible : अन्तर्द्धनगतिं शक्राल्लब्ध्वाऽन्तर्द्धनसंज्ञित:।

2. The Bhagavata, as usual, modifies this
genealogy : Antarddhana has by Sikhandini three
sons, who were the three fires. Pavaka, Pavamana,
and Suci. condemned by a curse of Vasistha to be
born again: by another wife, Nabhasvati, he has
Havirddhana, whose sons are the same as those of
the text, only giving another name, Varhisad as
well as Pricinaverhis to the first. According to the
Mahabharata,(Moksa Dharma), which has becn
followed by the Padma Purana, Prachinavarhis was
born in the family of Atri ; अत्रिवंशे समुत्पन्नो ब्रह्मयोनि:
सनातन: | प्राचीनवबर्हिर्भगवान्।

3. The text is, प्राचीनाग्रया: कुशास्तस्य पृथिव्यामभवन्।
KusSa or varhis is properly ‘sacrificial grass' (Poa);
and Prachinagra, literally, ‘having its tips towards
the east; the direction in which it should be placed
upon the ground, as a seat for the gods on occasion
of offerings made to them_ The name therefore
intimates, either that the practice originated with
him. or, as the commentator explains it, that he was
exceedingly devout, offering sacrifices or invoking
the gods every where: Waa यज्ञानुष्ठानात्। The Hari
Varisa adds a verse to that or our text reading.
प्राचीनग्रया: कुशास्तस्य पृथिव्यां जनमेजय। प्राचीनवर्हिर्भगवान्
पृथिवीतलचारिणा: | which Mons. Langlois has rendered,
‘Quand il marchoil sur la terre les poinlesde cousa
ctoient courbees vers }' Orient;' which he supposes
to mean. ‘Que ce prince avail toume sea pensdes et
porttf sa domination vers |'Qnent : a supposition
that might have been obviated by a little further
consideration of the verse of Manu to which he
refers. “If he have taken his seat on culms of grass
with their points towards the cast.” etc. The
commentary explains the passage as above,
referring पृथिवीतलचारिण: to BM not to तस्य। as पृथिव्यां
तस्य प्राचीनग्रया: कुशा: पृथिवीतलचारिण: भुव: स्वरूपे प्रसरन्त:
कृत्स्नभूमण्डलव्यापिन आसन् wa: स प्राचीनवर्हि:। 'He was
called Prachinavarhis. because his sacred grass,
pointing east, was going upon the very earth. or
was spread over the whole earth.’ The text of the
Bhagavata also explains clearly what is meant: यस्येदं

वितन्वत:। प्राचीनग्रयै: कुशैरासीदास्तृतं वसुधातलं।
‘By whose sacred grass, pointing to the east, as be
performed sacrifice after sacrifice, the whole earth,
his sacrificial ground, was overspread.
ke

THE VISNU-PURANAM
