264

THE VISNU-PURANAM

विष्णुरत्ता तथैवान्नं परिणामश्च & तथा।
सत्येन तेन वै oh जीर्यत्वन्नमिदं Tate vi

May Agasti, Agni and submarine fire effect
the digestion of the food of which I have
eaten; may they grant me the happiness which
its conversion into nutriment engenders; and
may health ever animate my form! May Visnu,
who is the chief principle of all invested with
bodily structure and the organs of sense, be
propitiated by my faith in him and influence
the assimilation of the invigorating food which
I have eaten! For verily Visnu is the eater and
the food and the nutriment : the through this
belief may that which I have eaten be
digested.'

इत्युच्चार्य्य स्वहस्तेन परिमृष्य तथोदरम्।

अनायासप्रदायीनि कुर्यात् कर्माण्यतन्दित:॥ ९५॥

सच्छरस्त्रादिविनोदेन सन्मार्गाद्यविरोधिना।

fet नयेत्तत: सन्ध्यामुपतिष्ठेत् समाहित:॥९६॥

दिनान्तसन्ध्यां सूर्येण पूर्वामृक्षैर्युतां बुध:।

उपतिष्ठेद् यथान्यायं सम्यगाचम्य TAI ९७॥

सर्वकालमुपस्थानं सनध्ययो: पार्थिवेष्यते।

अन्यत्र सूतकाशौचबिभ्रमातुरभीतित:।॥ ९ ८॥

सूर्येणाभ्युदितो यश्च त्यक्त: सूर्येण वा स्वपन्।

अन्यत्रातुरभावस्तु प्रायश्चित्ती भवेन्नर:॥ ९९॥

तस्मादनुदिते सूर्ये समुत्थाय महीपते।

उपतिष्ठेन्नर: सन्ध्यामस्वपंश्च दिनान्तजाम्।। १० ०॥

उपतिष्ठन्ति वै सन्ध्यां ये न पूर्वां न afar

व्रजन्ति ते दुरात्मानस्तामिस्रं नरकं FAM १० gil

"Having repeated this prayer, the

householder should rub his stomach with his
hand and without indolence perform such rites
as confer repose, passing the day in such
amusements as are authorised by holy writings
and are not incompatible with the practices of
the righteous; until the Sandhya, when he must
engage in pious meditation. At the Sandhya at
the close of the day he must perform the usual
rites before the sun has quite set; and in the
morning he must perform them before the
stars have disappeared.'” The moming and

evening rites must never be neglected, except
at seasons of impurity, anxiety, sickness or
alarm. He who is preceded by the sun in rising
or sleeps when the sun is setting, unless it
proceed from illness and the like, incurs gilt
which requires atonement; and therefore let a
man rise before the sun in the morning and
sleep not until after he has set. They who
sinfully omit both the morning and the
evening service go after death to the hell of
darkness.

पुन: पाकमुपादाय सायप्यवनीपते!
वैश्वदेवनिमित्तं वै पत्न्यमन्त्रं बलिं BAI १० २॥
तत्रापि श्वपचादिभ्यस्तथैवान्नविसर्जनम्।

अतिथिं चागतं TA स्वशक्त्या YAS बुध:।। १०३॥
पादशौचासनप्रह्वस्वागतोक्त्या च पूजनम्।
त्ततश्चान्नप्रदानेन शयनेन च पारथिव।। १०४॥
दिवातिथौ तु विमुखे गते यत् पातकं TT
तदेवाष्टगुणं पुंसां सूयेढि विमुखे wai १०५॥
तस्मात् स्वशक्त्या राजेन्द्र सूर्योढमतिथिं नर:।
पूजयेत्पूजिते तस्मिन्पूजिता: सर्वदेवता:।। १० ६॥
अन्नशाकाम्बुदानेन स्वशक्त्या प्रीणयेत्पुमान्।
शयनप्रस्तरमहीप्रदानैरथवापि तम्॥ १० ७॥

In the evening, then, having again dressed
food, let the wife of the householder, in order
to obtain the fruit of the Vaisvadeva rite, give
food, without prayers, to outcasts and unclean
spirits. Let the householder himself, according
to his means, again show hospitality to any
guest who may arrive, welcoming him with
the salutation of evening, water for his feet, a
seat, a supper and a bed. The sin of want of
hospitality to a guest who comes after sunset is
eight times greater than that of turning away
one who arrives by day. A man should
therefore most especially show respect to one
who comes to him in the evening for shelter,
as the attentions that gratify him will give
pleasure to all the gods. Let the householder,
then, according to his ability, afford a guest
food, potherbs, water, a bed, a mat or, if he can
do no more, ground on which to lie.
