BOOK II, CHAP. 14

215

तदन्तरे च भवता तदेतद्वाव्यमीरितम्।
aa परमार्थार्थं त्वयि चेत: प्रधावति।। cil

Upon these doctrines entering into my ears,
my mind, which is anxious to investigate the
truth, is lost in perplexity. It was my purpose,
illustrious sage, to have gone to Kapila Rsi, to
inquire of him what in this life was the most
desirable object: but now that I have heard
from you such words, my mind turns to you, to
become acquainted with the great end of life.

कपिलर्षिर्भगवत: सर्वभूतस्य वै द्विज!
विष्णोरंशो जगन्मोहनाशायोर्वीमुपागत:॥ ९॥
स एव भगवान् नूनमस्माकं हितकाम्यया।
प्रत्यक्षतामत्र गतो यथैतद् भवतोच्यते।। १०॥
तन्मह्यं प्रणताय त्वं यच्छेय: परमं द्विज!
तद्ददाखिलविज्ञाजजलवीच्युदधिर्भवान्।। ११॥

The Rsi Kapila is a portion of the mighty
and universal Visnu, who has come down
upon the earth to dissipate delusion; and surely
it is he who, in kindness to me, has thus
manifested himself to me in all that you have
said. To me, thus suppliant, then, explain what
is the best of all things; for you are an ocean
overflowing with the waters of divine
wisdom.”

ब्राह्मण उवाच

qa! पृच्छसि किं श्रेय: परमार्थं नु पृच्छसि।

श्रेयांसि परमार्थानि अशेवाणि च भूपते।। १२॥

देवताराधनं कृत्वा धनसम्पदमिच्छति।

पुत्रानिच्छति राज्यञ्च श्रेयस्तस्यैव ATT १३॥

कर्म्म यज्ञात्मकं श्रेय: स्वर्लोकिफलदायि च।

श्रेय: प्रधानञ्च फले तदेवानभिसंहिते।। १४॥

आत्मा AT: सदा भूप! योगयुक्तैस्तथापरम्।

श्रेयस्तस्यैव संयोग: HAT A; परमात्मना।। १५॥

श्रेयांस्येवमनेकानि शतशोऽथ सहस्रश:।

सन्त्यत्र परमार्थस्तु तत्त्वत: TAT च मे।। १६॥

The Brahmana replied to the king, “You,

again, ask me what is the best of all things, not

what is the great end of lifem' but there are
many things which are considered best, as well

as those which are the great ends (or truths) of
life. To him who, by the worship of the gods,
seeks for wealth, prosperity, children, or
dominion, each of these is respectively best.
Best is the rite or sacrifice, that is rewarded
with heavenly pleasures. Best is that which
yields the best recompense, although it be not
solicited. Self-contemplation, ever practised
by devout ascetics, is to them the best. But
best of all is the identification of soul with the
supreme spirit. Hundreds and thousands of
conditions may be called the best; but these
are not the great and true ends of life. Hear
what those are.

धर्माय त्यज्यते faq परमार्थो धनं ate!

व्ययश्य क्रियते कस्मात् कामप्राप्त्युपलक्षण:।। १७॥
पुत्रश्चेत् परमार्थ: स्यात् सोऽप्यन्यस्य नरेश्वर।
परमार्थभूत: सोऽन्यस्य परमार्थो हि तत्पिता।। १८॥
एवं न परमार्थोऽस्ति जगत्यस्मिंश्चराचरे।

परमार्थो fe कार्याणि कारणानामशेषत:।। १९॥
राज्यादिप्राप्तिरत्रोक्ता परमार्थतया यदि।

परमार्था भवन्त्यत्र न भवन्ति च वै AAI २०॥

Wealth cannot be the true end of life, for it
may be relinquished through virtue, and its
characteristic property is expenditure for the
gratification of desire. If a son were final truth,
that would be equally applicable to a different
source; for the son that is to one the great end
of life, becomes the father of another. Final or
supreme truth, therefore, would not exist in
this world, as in all these cases those objects
which are so denominated are the effects of
causes, and consequently are not finite. If the
acquisition of sovereignty were designated by
the character of being the great end of all, then
finite ends would sometimes be, and
sometimes cease to be.

ऋग्-यजु:सामनिष्पाद्यं यज्ञकर्म्म मतं तव।
परमार्थभूतं तत्रापि seat गदतो AAI 2 gl
ag निष्पाद्यत्ते कार्य्य ger कारणभूतया।

तत् कारणानुगमनाञ्जायते FA! मृन्मयम्।। २२॥
एवं विनाशिभिर्द्रव्यै: समिदाज्य-कुशादिभि:।
