BOOK I, CHAP. 17

109

समाहितमना भूत्वा यन्मे चेतस्यवस्थितम्॥ १४॥
अनादिमध्यान्तमजमव्रद्धिक्षयमच्युतम्।
प्रणतोऽस्मि महात्मानं सर्वकारणकारणम्॥ १५॥

Prahlada replied— “Hear, O sire, what in
obedience to your commands I will repeat, the
substance of all I have learned: listen
attentively to that which wholly occupies my
thoughts. I have learned to adore him who if
without beginning, middle, or end, increase or
diminution; the imperishable lord of the world,
the universal causes.”

पराशर Sara
एवं निशम्य दैत्येन्द्र: क्रोधसंरक्तलोचन:।
विलोक्य तद्गुरुं प्राह स्फुरिताधरपल्लव:। १६॥
ParaSara said— "On hearing these words,
the sovereign of the Daityas, his eyes red with

wrath, and lip swollen with indignation, turned
to the preceptor of his, son, and said,

ब्रह्मबन्धो! किमेतत् ते विपक्षस्तुतिसंहितम्।

असारं ग्राहितो बालो भामवज्ञाय SAT! १७॥

HiranyakaSipu said— “Vile Brahman, what
is this preposterous commendation of my foe,

that, in disrespect to me. you have taught this
boy to utter?”

गुरुरुवाच
दैत्येश्चर! न कोपस्य वशमागन्तुमर्हसि।
ममोपदेशजनितं नायं वदति ते सुत:।। १८॥
The Guru replied— "O king of the Daityas,
it is not worthy of you to give way to passion:

that which your son has uttered, he has not
been taught by me."

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
अनुशास्तोऽसि Srey वत्स।! प्रह्लाद कथ्यताम्।
ममोपदिष्टं नेत्येष प्रव्रवीति गुरुस्तव।। १९॥

Hiranyakasipu said— “by whom has this
lesson, boy, been taught you? your teacher
denies that it proceeds from him."

-प्रह्लाद Java

शास्ता विष्णुरशेषस्यं जगतो यो gfe स्थित:।

AAA परमात्मानं तात! क: केन VTA! ol

Prahlada answered— “Visnu, father is the
instructor of the whole world: what else

should any one teach or learn. save him. the
supreme spirit?"

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
कोऽयं विष्णु: सुदुर्बुद्धे! यं ब्रवीषि पुन: पुन:।
जगतामीश्वरस्येह पुरत: प्रसभं मम।। २१॥

“Blockhead," exclaimed the king, "who is
this Visnu, whose name you thus reiterate so
impertinently before me, who am _ the
sovereign of the three worlds?"

Wele उवाच
न शब्दगोचरे यस्य योगिध्येयं परं पदम्।
यतो यश्च स्वयं विश्यं स विष्णु: परमेश्वर:॥ २२॥
"The glory of Visnu," replied Prahlada, "is
to be medicated upon by the devout; it cannot

be described: he is the supreme lord, who is all
things, and from whom all things proceed."

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
परमेश्वरसंज्ञोऽज्ञ! किमन्यो मय्यवस्थिते।
तवास्ति raed प्रव्रवीषि पुन: TAU २३॥

To this the king rejoined, “Are you
desirous of death, fool, that you give the title
of supreme lord to any one whilst I survive?"
Were sara

न केवलं तात! मम प्रजानां
स ब्रह्मभूतो भवतश्च विष्णु:।
धाता विधाता परमेश्वरश्च
wale कोपं कुरुषे किमर्थम्॥२४॥

"Visnu, who is Brahma," said Prablada, "is
the creator and protector, not of me alone, but
of al! human beings, and even, father, of you:

he is the supreme lord of all. Why should you,
sire, be offended?"

हिरण्यकशिपुरुवाच
प्रविष्ट: कोऽस्य eed दुर्बुद्धेरतिपापकृत्।
