404

THE VISNU-PURANAM

India in the beginning of the Christian era, we learn
from Pliny, who describes them as possessed of
thirty fortified cities, with an army of 100,000 men
and 1000 elephants. The Andhra of this writer are
probably the people of the upper part of the
peninsula, Andhra being the proper designation of
Telirigana. The Peutingerian tables, however, place
the Andre-Indi on the banks of the Ganges and the
southern princes may have extended or shifted the
site of their power. Towrds the close of the dynasty
we find names that appear to agree with those of
princes of middle India, of whom mention is made
by the Chinese; as, Yue-gnai (Yajfiasri), king of
Kiapili, A.D. 408; Des Guignes, I. 45; and Ho-lo-
mien (Pulom4n), king of Magadha in 621; ibid, I.
56. The Pauranik lists place these two princes more
nearly together, but we cannot rely implicitly upon
their accuracy. Calculating from Candragupta
downwards, the Indian date of Yajfia and the
Chinese Yue-gnai corresponds; for we have, 10
Mauryas, 137 years 10 Sungas, 112. 4 Kanvas, 45.
27. Andhras, 437. Total 731. Deduct for
Candragupta's date 312 B.C. Total 419 A.C. A date
remarkably near that derivable from the Chinese
annals. If the Indian Puloman be the same with the
Chinese Ho-lo-mien, there must be some
considerable omission in the Pauranik dynasty.
There is a farther identification in the case of Ho-
lo-mien, which makes it certain that a prince of
Magadha is intended, as the place of his residence
is called by the Chinesc Kia-so-mo-pulo-ching and
Potoli-tse-ching; or in Sanskrit, Kusuma-pura and
Patali-putra. The equivalent of the latter name
consists, not only in the identiy of the sounds Patali
and Po-to-li, but in the translation of 'putra’ by ‘tse’;
each word meaning in their respective languages
‘son’. No doubt can be entertained therefore that the
city intended is the metropolis of Magadha, Pat
aliputra or Pali-bothra. Wilform identifies Pulomat
or Puloman with the Po-lo-muen of the Chinese;
but Des Guignes interprets Po-lo-muen kue,
‘royaume des Brahmanes'. Buchanan (Hamilton),
following the Bhagavata as to the name of the last
king, Sulomadhi, would place him about A.D. 846;
but his premises are far from accurte and his
deduction in this instance at least is of no weight.
Geneal. of the Hindus, Introduction p. 16. He
supposes the Andhra kings of Magadha to have
retained their power on the Ganges until the

Mohammedan invasion or the twelfth century,
when they retired to the south and reigned at
Warankal in Telifigdnd. Inscriptions and coins,
however, confirm the statement of the Purana, that
a different dynasty succeeded to the Andhras some
centuries before the Mohammedan conquests, and
the Chines also record, that upon the death of thc
king of Magadha, Ho-lo-mien (Puloman?), some
time before A.D. 648, great troubles in India took
place. Des Guignes. Some very curious and
authentic testimony to the actual existence of these
Andhra kings has been lately afforded by the
discovery of an ancient inscription in Gujarat, in
which Rudra Dam, the Ksatrapa or Satrap of Surds
tra, is recorded to have repeatedly overcome
Satakarni, king of the southern country (Daks
inapatha), The inscription is with out date, but it is
in an old character and makes mention of the two
Maurya princes, Candragupta and Asoka, as if not
very long prior to its composition. Prinsep, to
whom we are indebted for the deciphering and
translating of this important document, has been
also successfull in deciphering the legends on a
series of coins belonging to the princes of Surastra,
amongst whom the name of Rudra Dama occurs;
and he is inclined, although with hesitation, to place
these princes about a century after ASoka or Rudra
Dama abcut 153 B.C. J. As. Soc. Bengal, May 1837
and April 1838. According to the computation
hazarded above from our text, the race of Andhra
kings should not commence till about 20 years
B.C., which would agree with Pliny's notice of
them; but it is possible that they existed earlier in
the south of India, although they established their
authority in Magadha only in the first centuries of
the Christian era.

64. These parallel dynasties
particularised in our other authorities :

Abhiras, 7, M.; 10, V.; kings of Avabhrti, 7,
Bhagavata Garddabhins, 10, M. V. Bhagavata
Sakas, 18, M.V.; Kankas, 16, Bhagavata Yavanas,
8, M.V. Bhagavata, Tusaras, 14, M.V.; Tuskaras,
14, Bhagavata Marindas, 13, V.; Purtindos, 13, M.;
Suriindas, 10, Bhagavata Mannas, 18, V.; Hinas,
19, M.; Maulas, 11, Bhagavata. Total 85 kings,
Vayu; 89, Matsya; 76 and 1399 years, Bhagavata.

The other two authorities give the years of each
dynasty severally. The numbers are apparently
intendcd to be the same, but those of the Matsya are

are thus
