226

THE VISNU-PURANAM

हिररण्भगर्भस्य सुता और्ज्जनामसुतेजस:। The meaning of

which is, ‘There were (in the first Manvantara)
seven celebrated sons of Vasistha, who (in the third
Manvantara) were sons of Brahm (i.e. Rsis), the
illustrious posterity of Urjjé. We have already seen
that Urjja was the wife of Vasistha, by whom she
had seven sons, Rajas' (see Bk. I. Ch. X.), in the
Svayambhuva Manvantara; and these were born
again as the Rsis of the third period. The name of
these persons, according to the Matsya and Padma,
are however very different from those of the sons
of Vasistha, given Bk. 1. Ch. X. or Kaukundihi,
Kurundi, Dalaya, Sarikha, Pravahita, Mita and
Sammita.

9. The Vayu adds ten other names to those of the
text. The Brahma gives ten altogether different. The
Bhagavata and Padma have each a separate
nomenclature,

10. Of these, the Brahma and Hari Vamsa notice
only the Satyas : the Matsya and Padma have only
Sadhyas. The Vayu, Bhagavata, Kirma and
Markandeya agree with the text.

11, He is the son of Priyavrata, according to the
text, the Vayu, etc. The Markandeya has a legend
of his birth by a doe; and from his being begotten
in dark, tempestuous weather (441), he derives his
namie,

12. Severally, according to the Vayu, the
progeny of Bhrgu, KaSyapa, Angiras, Pulastya,
Atri, Vasistha and Pulaha. There is considerable
variety in some of the names. Thus the Matsya has
Kavi, Prthu, Agni, Salpa, Dhimat, Kapi, Akapi. The
Hari Varmsa has Kavya, Prthu, Agni, Jahnu, Dhatni,
Kapivat, Akapivat. For the two last the Vayu reads
Gatra and Vanakapivat. The son of Pulaha is in his
place (Bk I. Ch. X. n. 6), Arvarivat or Vanakapivat.
Gatra is amongst the sons of Vasistha (BK. I Ch.
X). The Vayu is therefore probably most correct,
although our text, in regard to these two
denominations, admits of no doubt; अम्निर्बनकस्तथा।
पीवरश्च।

13. The Vayu, agree with the text; the Vayu
naming eleven, the Brahma, Matsya and Padma
have a series of ten names, Sutapas, Tapomtila; of
which seven are the Rsis of the twelfth Manvantara.

14, Raivata, as well as his three predecessors, is
regarded usually as a descendant of Priyavrata. The
Markandcya has a long legend of his birth, as the
son of king Durgama by the nymph Revati, sprung

from the constellation Revati, whom Ritavak, a
Muni, caused to fall from heaven. Her radiance
became a lake on mount Kumuda, hence called
Raivataka; and from it appeared the damsel, who
was brought up by Pramuca Muni. Upon the
marriage of Revati, the Muni, at her request,
restored the asterism to its place in the skies.

15. The Brahma inserts of these only the
Abhiitarajasas, with the remark, that 'they were of
like nature (with their name) दॆवाश्चाभूतरजसस्तथा THAI:
स्मृता:। ie, they were exempt from the quality of
passion. M. Langlois, in rendering the parallel
passage of the Hari Vamsa. has confounded the
epithet and the subject : ‘dont les dieux furent les
Pracritis, depourvu de colere et de passion.’ He is
also at a loss what to do with the terms Pariplava
and Raibhya, in the following passage;
पारिप्लवञ्चरैभ्यश्च। asking, ‘gu'est ce quo Pariplava?
quest ce que Rebhya?' tf he had the commentary at
hand, these questions would have been
unnecessary: they are there said to be two classes of
divinities ; भ्यश्च देवतागणविशेषौ।

16. There is less variety in these names than
usual. Vedabahu is read Devabahu; Sudhéman,
Satyanetra; and Mahdmuni, Muni, Yajur, Vasistha
and Yadudhra. According to the Vayu, those of the
text are respectively of the lineage of Argiras,
Bhrgu, Vasistha, Pulastya, Atri, Pulaha and
KaSyapa. There is considerable variety in the names
of the Manu's sons.

17. Caksusa, according to the best authorities,
descended from Dhruva (see Bk. I. Ch. XIII); but
the Markandeya has a legend of his birth as the son
of a Ksatriya, named Anamitra; of his being
exchanged at his birth for the son of Visranta Raja
and being brought up by the prince as his own; of
his revealing the business when a man and
propitiating Brahma by his devotions; in
consequence of whic he became a Manu. In his
former birth he was born from the eye of Brahma :
when his name, from Caksusa, ‘the eye.’

18. The authorities agree as to the number, but
differ as to the names : reading for Adyas, Aryas
and Apyas: for Prastitas, Prabhiitas and Prastitas;
for Prthugas, Prthukas and Prthusas; and, which is a
more wide deviation, Rbhus for Bhavyas. M.
Langlois omits the Prastitas and inserts Divaukasas;
but the latter, meaning ‘divinitics,' is only an
epithet. The Hari Varhsa has, आद्या: wae ऋभव:
पृथुगाश्नदिवौकस:। लखाश्च-~- The comment adds, दिवौकस
इति सर्वेषां विशेषणं।
