BOOK II, CHAP. 3

157

3. For additional mountains in the Vayu, see
Asiatic Researches, VI11 334. The Bhagavata,
Padma. and Markandeya and the following:
Maindaka. which it appcars from the Ramayana is at
the source of the Sone, that river being termed
Mainakaprabhava, Kishkindhya Kanda; Trikita,
called also in Hemachandra's vocabulary Suvela;
Rsabha. Kitaka, Konva, Devagiri (Deogur or
Ellora, the mountain of the gods; the Apocopi are
said by Ptolemy to be also called mountains of the
gods): Rsyamuka in the Dekhin, where the Pampa
rises; Sri-Saila or Sri-parvata, near the Krishna (As.

Res. V. 303); Venkata. the hill of
Tripati. Varidhatra, | Mangala-prastha. Drona,
Chitrakiita (Chitrakote in Bundelkhand),

Govarddhana (near Mathura), Raivata, the range
that branches off from the western portion of the
Vindhya towards the north, extending nearly to the
Yamuna: according to Hemachandra it is the
Girinara range; it is the Aravali of Tod; Kakubha.
Nila (the blue mountains of Orissa). Gohamukha,
Indrakila, Ramagiri (Ram-tek, near Nagpur),
Valakrama, Sudhima, Tungaprastha, Naga (the
hills east of Ramghur), Bodhana, Pandara,
Durjayanta, Arbuda (Abu in Guzerat), Gomanta (in
the western Ghats), KtitaSaila, Kritasmara, and
Cakora. Many single mountains are named in
different works.

4 See Bk. II., Ch. IIL, note 4.

5 The Sarsuti, or Kaggar or Gaggar, N. W. of
Tahnesar. See below, note 6.

6. The Bahuda is elscwhere said to rise in the
Himalaya. Wilford considcrs it to be the Mahanada,
which falls into the Gafiga below Malda. The
Mahabharata has amongst the Tirthas, or places of
pilgrimage, two rivers of this name, one apparently
near the Sarasvati one more to the east.
Hemachandra gives as synonyms Arjuni and
Saitavahini both implying the white river: a main
feeder of the Mahanada is called Dhavali or Dauli,
which has the same meaning.

7. The Drsadvati is a river of considerable
importance in the history of the Hindus, although
no traces of its ancient name exist. According to
Manu it is one boundary of the district called
Brahmavartta in which the institution of castes, and
their several duties, had for ever existed: implying
that in other places they were of more recent origin.
This holy land 'made by the gods,’ was of very

limited extent. Its other boundary was the Sarasvati
That the Drsadvati was not far off we learn from
Manu, as Kuruksetra, Matsya, Paficdla, and
Sarasena, or the upper part of the Doab, and
country to the east, were not included in
Brahmavartta; they constituted Brabmarsi-desa,
contiguous to it, ब्रह्मवर्त्तदनन्तर:। Kullika Bhatta
explains Anantara, somcthing less or inferior;
किंचिदून:। but it more probably means ‘not divided
from’, immediately contiguous. We must look for
the Drsadvati therefore, west of thc Yamuna. In the
Tirtha Yatra of the Mahabharata we find it forming
one of the boundaries of Kuruksetra. It is there said,
Those who dwell on the south of the Sarasvati and
north of the Driashvati, or in Kurukgetra, dwell in
heaven.’ दक्षिणेन सरस्वत्या: दृषद्वदुत्तरेण च। ये वसन्ति Pear ते
वसन्ति त्रिविष्टपे।। In the same place, the confluence of
the Drsadvati with a stream of Kuruksetra, called
the Kausiki, is said to be of peculiar sanctity.
Kurukshetra is the country about Tahnesure or
Sthanegvara, where is spot called Kurukhet still
exists, and is visited in pilgrimage. The Kuruksetra
of Manu may be intended for the country of the
Kurus, in the more immediate vicinity of Delhi.
According to Wilford the Drsadvati is the Kaggar;
in which case our maps have taken the liberty of
transposing the names of the rivers, as the Kaggar
now is the northern stream, and the Sarsuty the
southern, both rising in the Himalaya, and uniting
to form one river, called Gagar or Kaggar in the
maps, but more correctly Sarsuti or Sarasvati;
which then runs south-west, and is lost in the
desert. There have no doubt been considerable
changes here, both in the nomenclature and in the
courses of the rivers.

8. The Beyah, Hyphasis. or Bibasis.

9. The Ravi or Hydraotes or Adris.

10. The Jhelum, but still called in Kashmir the
Vitasta. the Bidaspes or Hydaspes.

11. This river, according to the Visnu P., rises
from the Rksa mountains, but the Vayu and Kirma
bring it from the Vindhya or Sathpura range. There
are several indications of its position in the
Mahabharata, but none very precise. Its source
appears to be near that of the Krisna: it flows near
the beginning of the Dandaka forest, which should
place it rather near to the sources of the Godavari: it
passes through Vidarbha or Berar, and, Yudhisthira
having bathed in it, comes to the Vaidurya
