BOOK Ill, CHAP. 2

227

19. The Vayu reads Sudhdman for the first
name; Unnata for Uttama; and Abhimdna for
Abhiniman. The latter occurs also Abhinamin
(Matsya) and Atinaman (Hari Varnga). The latter
reads, no doubt incorrectly, Bhrgu, Nabha and
Vivasvat for Uttama, Madhu and Havismat. The
sons of Caksusa are enumerated, Bk. I. Ch. XIII.

20. There is no great variety of nomenclature in
this Manvantara. The Vayu adds to the deities the
Sadhyas, Visvas, Maruts and gods sprung from
Bhrgu and Angiras. The Bhagavata adds the Rbhus
: and most include the two Asvins as a class. Of the
Maruts, however, the Hari Variga remarks that they
are born in every Manvantara, seven times seven
(or forty-nine); that in each Manvantara four times
seven or twenty-eight, obtain emancipation, but
their places are filled up by persons reborn in that
character. So the commentator explains the
passages मन्वन्तरेषु Way प्राग्दिश: सप्त सप्तका: and मन्वन्तरे
देवा: प्रतिमन्वन्तरे भवन्ति। Comment, तेषां मध्ये चत्वार: सप्तका
अष्टाविंशतिमरुत:। Comment. It may be suspected,
however, that these passages have been derived
from the simple statement of the Matsya, that in all
the Manvantara classes of Rsis appear by seven and
seven and having established a code of law and
morality, depart to felicity : TARY Wedy Wa सप्त
neva: | कृत्वा धर्म्मव्यवस्थानं प्रयान्ति WA पदं। The Vayu has
a rather different list of the seven Rsis; or Vasumat,
the son of Vasistha; Vatsdéra, descended from
KaSyapa; Visvamitra, the son of Gadhi and of the
Kusika race; Jamadagni, son of Kuru, of the race of
Bhrgu; Bharadvaja, son of Brhaspati; Saradvat, son
of Gautama, of the family of Utatthya; and
Brahmakoga or Atri, descended from Brahma. All
the other authorities agree with our text.

21. The nominal father being the patriarch Ruci.
(See Bk. I. Ch. VIL)

22. There is no further account of this
incarnation in the Visnu Purana. Fuller details
occur in the Bhagavata, Kirma, Matsya and
Vamana Puranas, The first of these (b. VHI. c. 15-
23) relates the penance and sacrifices of Bali, son
of Virocana, by which he had-overcome Indra and
the gods and obtained supreme dominion over the
three spheres. Visnu, at the request of the deities,
was born as a dwarf, Vamana, the son of Aditi by
Kasyapa, who, applying to Bali for alms, was
promised by the prince whatever he might demand,

notwithstanding Sukra, the preceptor of the
Daityas, apprised him whom he had to decal with.
The dwarf demanded as much space as he could
step over at three steps; and upon the assent of Bali,
enlarged himself to such dimensions as to stride
over the three worlds. Being worshipped however
by Bali and his ancestor Prahlada, he conceded to
them the sovereignty of Patala.
23. See the same etymology, Bk. I. ch. I. n. 7.

oe ee
