212

यो भवान् यन्निमित्तं वा यदागमनकारणम्।
तत्सर्वं कथ्यतां fast! wet शुश्रूषवे त्वया॥७९)॥
Having thus spoken, the Brahmana was

silent, and went on hearing the palankin; but
the king leaped out of it, and hastened to
prostratc himself at his feet; saying, “Have
compassion on me, Brahman, and cast aside
the palankin; and tell me who you are, thus
disguised under the appearance of a fool.”

ब्राह्मण sara

श्रूयतां कोऽहमित्येतद्वक्तुं ya! न शक्यते।

उपभोगनिमित्तिञ्च सर्वत्र गमनक्रिया॥८०॥

सुखदु:खोपभोगौ तु at देहाद्युपपादकौ।

धर्माध्मद्भिवौ भोक्तुं जन्तुर्देहादिमृच्छति।। ८ en

सर्वस्यैव fe yore! Set: सर्वत्र कारणम्।

धर्माधर्मौ यत: कस्मात् कारणं पृच्छ्यते ATTN ८ २॥

The Brahmana answered and said, “Hear

me, Raja. Who I am it is not possible to say :
arrival at any place is for the sake of fruition;
and enjoyment of pleasure, or endurance of
pain, is the cause of the production of the
body. A living being assumcs a corporeal form
to reap the results of virtue or vice. The
universal cause of all living creatures is virtue
or vice : why therefore inquire the cause (of
my being the person I appear).”

राजोवाच

धर्माधर्मौ न सन्देह: सर्वकार्येषु कारणम्।

उपभोगनिमित्तञ्च देहाद्देहान्तरागम:।। ८३॥

यत्त्वेतद् भवता प्रोक्तं कोऽहमित्येतदात्मन:।

ah न शक्यते श्रोतुं तन्ममेच्छा प्रवर्त्तते॥ ८ ४॥

योऽस्ति सोऽहमिति Taq! कथं ay न शब्न्यते।

आत्मन्येष न दोषाय शब्दोऽहमिति यो fan cunt

The king said, “Undoubtedly virtue and

vice are the causes of all existent effects, and
migration into sevcral bodies is for the
purpose of receiving their consequences; but
with respect to what you have asserted, that it

is not possible for you to tell me who you are,
that is a matter which I am desirous to hear

THE VISNU-PURANAM

explained. How can it be impossible,
Brahmana, for any one to declare himself to be
that which he is? There can be no detriment to
one’s-self from applying to it the word I,”

ब्राह्मण sara

शब्दोऽहमिति दोषाय आत्मन्येष तथैव तत्।
अनात्मन्यात्मविज्ञानं wel वा भ्रान्तिलक्षण:।। ८ ६॥
जिह्वा व्रवीत्यहमिति दन्तोष्ठौ तालुकं नृप!

WA नाहं यत: सर्वे वाङ्निष्पादनहेतव:॥ ८७॥

किं हेतुभिर्वदत्येषा वागेवाहमिति स्वयम्।

तथापि any arenas वक्तुमित्यं न युज्यते।। ८ ८॥
पिण्ड: पृथग् यत: पुंस: शिर:पाण्यादिलक्षण:।
ततोऽहमिति कुम्रैतां dat राजन्! करोम्यहम्।। ८ ९॥

The Brahmana said, “It is true that there is
no wrong done to that which is one’s-sclf by
the application to it of the word J; but the term
is characteristic of error, of conceiving that to
be the self (or soul) which is not self or soul.
The tongue articulates the word I, aided by the
lips, the teeth, and the palate; and these are the
origin of the expression, as they are the causes
of the production of speech. If by these
instruments speech is able to utter the word I,
it is nevertheless improper to asscrt that
speech itself is I.'2 The body of a man,
characterized by hands, feet, and the like, is
made up of various parts; to which of these
can I properly apply the denomination I?

यद्यन्योऽस्ति पर: कोऽपि मत्त: पार्थिवसत्तम!
तदैषोऽहमयञ्चान्यो वक्तुमेवमपीष्यते॥९०॥।

यदा समस्तदेहेषु पुमानेको व्यवस्थित:।

तदा fe को wary कोऽहमित्येतद् विफलं वच:।॥ ९१॥
त्वं राजा शिबिका चेयमिमे वाहा: पुर:सुरा:।

अयञ्च भवतो लोको न सदेतन्नृपोच्यते॥ ९ २॥

If another being is different spccifically
from me, most excellent monarch, then it may
be said that this is I; that is the other: but when
one only soul is dispersed in all bodies, it is
then idle to say, Who arc you? who am I? You
arc a king; this is a palankin; these are the
bearers; these the running footmen; this is
