80

4. So the inscription upon the temple of Sais :
Eyo apt mav to yeyov& Kor KOI ov, Kal
६०5[६४0४, So the Orphic verse, thed by Eusebius,
beginning Ev 6६ deuaé Baoidsiov w a tade
TMAVTA KVAEITAL, K, t. A. One regal body in which
all things are comprehended (viz, Virat). fire. and
water, and earth, and air, and night, and day. and
Intelligence (viz. Mahat) the first generator, and
divine love; for all these does Jupiter include in his
expansive form.' It proceeds also. precisely in the
Pauranic strain, to describe the members of this
universal form : the heaven in his head, the stars his
hair, the sun and moon his eyes, etc.

5. A piece of natural history quite correct as
applied to the front teeth which in the genus ox
occur in the lower jaw only.

6. This is also conformable to the doctrine, that
the rudiments of plants exist in their cotyledons.

7. In life. or living beings, perception depends
not. according to Hindu metaphysics, upon the
external senses, but the impressions made upon
them are communicated to the mental organ or
sense, and by the mind to the
understanding-—-Samvid (संबिद ) in the text—by
which they are distinguished as pleasurable,
painful, or mixed. But pleasure depends upon the
quality of goodness, pain on that of darkness, and
their mixture on that of foulness, inherent in the
understanding. properties. belonging to Jiveswara.
or god. as one with life, or to embodied spirit. but
not as Parameswara. or supreme spirit.

8. The station or sphere is that of the north pole.
or of the polar star. In the former case, the star is
considered to be Suniti, the mother of Dhruva. The
legend, although as it is related in our text it differs
in its circumstances from the story told by Ovid of
Callisto and her son Arcas, whom Jove

Imposuit Caelo vicinaque sidera fecit,

sugggcsts some suspicion of an original identity.
In ncither of the authorities’ have we, perhaps, the
primitive fable. It is evident from the quotation that
presently follows in the text, of a stanza by Usanas,
that the Purana has not the oldest version of the
legend; and Ovid's representation of it is after a
fashion of his own: all that has been retained of the
original is the conformity of the chracters and of
the main Incident, the translation of a mother and
her son to the heavens as constellations, in which
the polc-star is the most conspicuous luminary.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

9. The Vaimanika devas. the deities who travel
in Viméanas. ‘heavenly car,’ or rather 'moving
spheres.'

10. The text says merely सुनीतिर्नाम सूनृता। the
commentator says. ‘perhaps formerly so called;
पूर्व्वनाम atl We have already remarked that some
Puranas so denominate her.

1-1 The legend of Dhruva is narrated in the
Bhagavata, Padma (Swarga Khanda), Agni. and
Naradiya, much to the same purport, and partly in
the same words, ‘as our text. The Brahma and its
double the Hari Varhsa, the Matsya. and Vayu
merely allude to Dhruva's having been transferred
by Brahm to the skies, in reward of his austerities.
The story of his religious penance, and adoration of
Visnu, seems to be an embellishment interpolated
by the Vaisnava Puranas. Dhruva being adopted as
a Saint by their sect. The allusion to Sarta in our
text concurs with the form of the story as it appears
elsewhere, to indicate the priority of the more
simple legend.

RE
