24

worlds with a thundering noise. Before his
breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were
scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter
amongst the bristles upon the scriptural body-
of the boar, trembling as he rose up,
supporting the earth, and dripping with
moisture. Then the great sages, Sanandana and
the rest, residing continually in the sphere of
saints, were inspired with delight, and bowing
lowly they praised the stern-eyed upholder of
the earth.
जयेश्वराणां परमेश केशव
प्रभो गदाशंखधरासि was
प्रसूति नाशस्थितिहेतुरीश्वर-

स्त्वमेव नान्यत् परमञ्च यत् परम्।। ३ १॥
Wey वेदास्तव Gods दन्तेषु यज्ञाश्लितयश्च वक्त्र
हुताशजिह्वोऽसि तनूरुहाणि दर्भा: wit यज्ञपुमांस्त्वमेव।। ३२
विलोचने रात्र्यहनी महात्मन् सर्वाश्रयं ब्रह्मपदं शिरस्ते।
सूक्तान्यशेषाणि सटाकलापो घ्राणं समस्तानि हवींषि देव।।
स्रुक्तुण्डसामस्वरधीरनाद प्राग्वंशकायाखिलसत्रसन्धे।
पूर्तेष्टधर्म्मथ्रवणोऽसि Fa सनातनात्मन् भगवन् प्रसीद।। ३४॥
पदक्रमक्रान्तभुवं भवन्तमादिस्थितिञ्चाक्षर विश्वमूर्ते।
विश्वस्य far: परमेश्वरोऽसि प्रसीद नाथोऽसि चराचरस्य।।
दंष्टाग्रविन्यस्तमशेषमेतद् भूमण्डलं नाथ विभाव्यते ते।
विगाहत: पद्मवनं विलग्नं सरोजिनीपत्रमिवोढषङ्कम्॥ ३ ६॥

द्यावापृथिव्योरतुलप्रभाव
यदन्तरं aq वपुषा तवैव।
व्याप्तं ate:
हिताय विश्वस्य विभो भव त्वम्।।३७॥
परमार्थस्त्वमेवैको नान्योऽस्ति जगत: पते:।

तवैषं महिमा येन व्याप्तमेतच्चराचरम्।। ३ ८॥

The Yogis said~ Triumph, lord of lords
supreme; KeSava, sovereign of the earth, the
wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and
the sword: cause of production, destruction,
and existence. You are, oh god : there is no
other supreme condition, but you. You. lord,
are the person of sacrifice: for your feet are the
Vedas; your tusks are the stake to which the
victim is bound; in your teeth are the

THE VISNU-PURANAM

offerings; your mouth is the altar; your tongue
is the fire; and the hairs of your body are the
sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent
are day and night; your head is the seat of all,
the place of Brahma; your mane is all the
hymns of the Vedas; your nostrils are all
oblations: oh you, Whose snout is the ladle of
oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of
the Sama Veda; whose body is the hall of
sacrifice; whose joints are the different
ceremonies; and whose ears have the
properties of both voluntary and obligatory
riles;’ do you who arc eternal, who are in size
a mountain, be propitious. We acknowledge
you, who has traversed the world, oh universal
form, to be the beginning, the continuance,
and the destruction of all things: you are the
supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of
conscious and unconscious beings. The orb of
the earth is seen seated on the tip of your
tusks, as if you had been sporting amid a lake
where the lotus floats, and had borne away the
leaves covered with soil. The space between
heaven and earth is occupied by your body, oh
you of unequalled glory, resplendent with the
power of pervading the universe, oh lord, for
the benefit of all. You are the aim of all: there
is none othcr than you, sovereign of the world:
this is your might, by which all things, fixed or
movable, are pervaded.

तदेतद् दृश्यते मूर्त्तमेतज्ञानात्मनस्तव।
भ्रान्तिज्ञानेन पश्यन्ति जगद्रूपमयोगिन:।। ३ ९॥
ज्ञानस्वरूपमखिलं जगदेतदबुद्धय:।
अर्थस्वरूपं पश्यन्तो WAT मोहसंप्लवे॥४०॥
ये तु ज्ञानविद: शुद्धचेतसस्तेऽखिलं जगत्।
ज्ञानात्मकं प्रपश्यन्ति त्वद्रूपं THAT ४१॥
wate सर्वसर्वात्मन् भवाय जगतामिमाम्।
उद्धरोर्वीभमेयात्मन् शंन्नो देह्यब्जलोचन।।`४ २॥

This form, which is now beheld, is your
form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those
who have not practised devotion, conceive
erroneously of the nature of the world. The
ignorant, who do not perceive that this
