522

THE VISNU-PURANAM

ततोऽर्जुनो धनुर्दिव्यं गाण्डीवमजरं युधि।
आरोपितुं समारेभे न शशाक स वीर्यवान् ॥२१॥
चकार सज्यं Hepes तचचाभूच्छिथिलं पुन: ।

न सस्मार तथास्त्राणि चिन्तयन्नपि पाण्डव:॥ २२॥
शरान्सुमोच चै aq पार्थो वैरिष्वमर्षित:।

त्वग्भेद ते परं चक्रुरस्ता गाण्डीवधन्वना।। २३॥
वह्निना येऽक्षया दत्ता: शरास्तेऽपि क्षयं ययु:।
युध्यत: सह WUT भवक्षये।। २४॥
यन्मया शरसङ्घातै:.सकला भूभुजो जिता:॥ २५॥
मिषत: पाण्डुपुत्रस्य ततस्ता प्रमदोत्तमा:।
आगभीरैरपकृष्यन्त्य: कामाचचान्या प्रवव्रजु:।। २६॥
aa: शरेषु क्षीणेषु धनुष्कोट्या धनञ्जय:। .
जघान SAR चास्य प्रहारान् जहसुर्मुने॥ २७॥
प्रेक्षतश्चैव पार्थस्य व्ष्णयन्धकवरस्तिय: |

जग्मुरादाय ते म्लेच्छा: सम्मता मुनिसत्तम।। २८॥

The son of Prtha, Arjuna, halted the people
he had brought from Dvaraké in the Paficanada
country’, in a rich and fertile spot; but the
desires of the robbers (of the neighbourhood)
were excited, when they observed so many
widowed females, also such great riches, in
the possession of Arjuna alone. Inflamed by
their cupidity, they assembled the villainous
Abhira’, and said to them, “Here is this
Arjuna, immensely rich, and having numerous
women, whose husbands have been slain,
passing confidently amongst us; a disgrace to
all brave men. His pride is raised by the death
of Bhisma, Drona, Jayadratha, Karna, and
others, whom he has slain: he does not know
the prowess of simple villagers. Up, up; take
you long thick staves: this stupid fellow
despises us. Why should we not lift up our
arms?” So saying, they rushed, armed with
cudgels and clods of earth, upon the people,
who were without their lord. Arjuna
encountered them, and said to them in
derision, “Retire, wretches, ignorant of what is
right, unless you are desirous of dying.” But
they disregarded his menaces, and seized his

treasures and his women, the wives of Visvaks
ena. Thereupon Arjuna began to brace his
heavenly bow Gandiva, irresistible in battle;
but it was in vain; for, in spite of all his efforts
to tighten it, it continued flaccid: neither could
he call to recollection the incantations of the
superhuman weapons. Losing all patience, he
launched, as best he might, his shafts upon the
enemy; but those shot from Gandiva merely
scratched the skin. The arrows given him by
Agni to carry certain destruction now were
themselves destroyed, and were fatal to Arjuna
in his contest with herdsmen. He endeavoured
to recall the might to Krsna; animated by
which, his numerous arrows had overthrown
mighty kings; but he tried in vain, for now
they were put aside by the peasants, or they
flew at random, wide of their aim. His arrows
being expended, he beat the banditti with the
horn of his bow; but they only laughed at his
blows: and the barbarians, in the sight of
Arjuna, carried off all the women of the Vrsni
and Andhaka tribes, and went their way’.

तत: सुदु:खितो जिष्णु ae कष्टमिति क्रुवन्।
अहो भगवता तेन मुषितोऽस्मि रुरोद SUM
तद्धनुस्तानि चास्त्राणि स रथस्ते च वाजिन:।
सर्वमेकपदे नष्टं दानमश्रोत्रिये BAT ३०॥
अहोऽतिबलवद्दैवं विना तेन महात्मना।
यदसामर्थ्ययुक्तेऽपि नीचवर्गे जयप्रदम् 3 el
ah ag स मे मुष्टि: स्थानं aq सोऽस्मि चार्जुन:।
पुण्यनैव विना तेन गतं सर्वमसारताम्।। ३ २॥
ममार्जुनत्वं भीमस्य भीमत्व तत्कृतं ध्रुवम्।

विना तेन यदाभीरैर्जितोऽहं कथमन्यथा॥ ३ ३॥
इत्यं वदन् ययौ जिष्णुर्मथुराख्यं पुरोत्तमम्।
चकार WA राजानं वज्रं यादवनन्दनम्॥ ३ ४॥

a ददर्श ततौ व्यासं फाल्गुन काननाश्रयम्।
त्तमुपेत्य महाभागं विनयेनाभ्यवादयत्।। ३५॥

त्तं वन्दमानं चरणाववलोक्य मुनिश्चिरम्।

उवाच पार्थ विच्छाय: कथमत्यन्तमीदृश:।॥ ३ ६॥
अवीरजोऽनुगमनं ब्रह्महत्याथवा कृता।
दृढाशाभङ्गदु:खी वा भ्रष्टच्छायोऽसि साम्प्रतम् ॥३७॥
