BOOK I, CHAP. 8

CHAPTER 8

अष्टरमोऽध्याय:
(लक्षम्युत्पत्तिकथनम्)

UWI उवाच

कथितस्तामस: सर्गो ब्रह्मणस्ते महामुने।

रुद्रसर्गं प्रवक्ष्यामि at निगदत: शृणु।। gH

ParasSara~—have described to you, oh great
Muni, the creation of Brahma, in which the
quality of darkness prevailed. I will now
explain to you the creation of Rudra.’

प्रादुरासीत् WAS कुमारो नीललोहित:॥ २॥

रुदन् वै सुस्वरं सोऽथ द्रवंश्च द्विजसत्तम।।

किं रोदिषीत तं wen रुदन्तं प्रत्युवाच Bu ३॥

नाम देहीति तं सोऽथ प्रत्युवाच प्रजापतिम्।

ered देव नाम्नासि मा रोदीर्धघैर्यमावह।। ४॥

In the beginning of the Kalpa. as Brahma
purposed to create a son, who should be like
himself, a youth of a purple complexion’
appeared, crying with a low cry, and running
about.’ Brahma, when he beheld him thus
afflicted, said to him, "Why do you weep ?"
"Give me a name,' replied the boy. "Rudra be

your name.” rejoined the great father of all
creatures :` "be composed; desist from tears.”

एवमुक्त: YA: सोऽथ सप्तकृत्वो रुरोद वै।
ततोऽन्यानि ददौ तस्मै सप्त नामानि वै प्रभु:।
स्थानानि चैषामष्टानां welt: पुत्रांश्च वै प्रभु:।।५॥
भवं wd महेशानं तथा पशुपतिं द्विज।

भीममुग्रं महादेवं उवाच स पितामह:। ६॥

चक्रे नामान्यथैतानि स्थानान्येषां चकार स:।
सूर्यो जलं मही वह्निर्वायुराकाशमेव च।

दीक्षितो ब्राह्मण: सोम इत्येतास्तनव: HARTI VII

But, thus addressed, the boy still wept
seven-times, and Brahma therefore gave to
him seven other denominations; and to these
cight persons regions and wives and posterity
belong. The eight manifestations, then, are

47

named Rudra, Bhava, Sarva. Isana. Pasupati.
Bhima, Ugra. and Mahadeva, which were
given to them by their great progenitor. He
also assigned to them their respective stations.
the sun, water, ether, air, fire, earth, the
ministrant Brahman, and the moon; for these
are their several forms.*

सुवर्चला तथैवोमा सुकेशी चापरा शिवा।

स्वाहा दिशस्तथा दीक्षा रोहणी च यथाक्रमम्॥ ८॥।

सूर्यादीनां नरश्रेष्ठ रुद्राद्यैर्नामभि: सह।

पत्न्य: स्मृता महाभाग तदपत्यानि मे शृणु।

येषां सूतिप्रसूतैर्वा इदमापूरितिं जगत्।। ९॥

शनैश्चरस्तथा शुक्रो लोहिताङ्गो मनोजव:।

स्कन्द: खर्गोऽथ सन्तानो बुधश्चानुक्रमात् सुता:।। १०॥

The wives of the sun and the other
manifestations, termed Rudra and the rest
were respectively, Suvercala, Uma, Vikesi,
Siva, Svaha, Disa, Diksé and Rohini. Now
hear an account of their progeny, by whose
successive generations this world has been
peopled. Their sons, then, were severally,
Sanaisocara (Saturn), Sukra (Venus), the fiery-

bodied Mars, Manojava (Hanuman), Skanda.
Swarga, Santina, and Budha (Mercury).

एवम्प्रकारो रुद्रोऽसौ wal भार्य्यमविन्दत।॥।
दक्षकोपाद् तत्याज सा `सती स्वं कलेवरम्।। VAM
fevagian साभून्मेनायां द्विजसत्तम।

उपयेमे पुनश्चोमामनन्यां भगवान् भव:।। १२॥
देवौ धातृविधातारौ yt: ख्यातिरसूयत।

श्रियञ्च देवदेवस्य पत्नी नारायाणस्य या।। १३॥

It was the Rudra of this description that
married Sati, who abandoned her corporeal
existence in consequence of the displeasure of
Daksa.’ She afterwards was the daughter of
Himavan (the snowy mountains) by Mena; and
in that character, as the only Uma, the mighty
Bhava again married her.° The divinities Dhati
and Vidhata were born to Bhrgu by Khyati, as
was a daughter, Sri. the wife of Narayana, the
god of gods.’
