BOOK V, CHAP. 33

मुमुक्षुर्बाणनाशाय विज्ञातस्विपुरद्दिषा।॥ 3 ९॥
स उपेत्याह गोविन्दं सामपूर्वमुमापति:।
विलोक्य aut दोर्दण्डच्छेदासकस्राववर्षिणम्।।४०॥

The destroyer of the demon host therefore
took up his discus Sudargana, blazing with the
radiance of a hundred suns. As he was in the
act to casting it, the mystical goddess Kotavi,
the magic lore of the demons, stood naked
before him.* Seeing her before him, Krsna,
with unclosed eyes, cast SudarSana, to cut off
the arms of Bana. The discus, dreaded in its
flight by the whole of the weapons of the
demons, lopped off successively the numerous
arms of the Asura. Beholding Krsna with the
discus again in his hand, and preparing to
launch it once more, for the total demolition of
Bana, the foe of Tripura (Siva) respectfully
addressed him. The husband of Uma, sceing
the blood streaming from thc 'dissevercd arms
of Bana, approached Govinda, to solicit a
suspension of hostilities, and said to him,

SR उवाच

कृष्ण! कृष्ण! जगन्नाथ WA! त्वां पुरुषोत्तमम्।

यरेशं परमानन्दमनादि-निधेनं परम्॥४१।

देव-तिर्यङ्-मनुष्येषु शरीरग्रहणात्मिका।

लीलेयं सर्वभूतस्य तव चेष्टापलक्षणा।। ४२॥

तत् प्रसीदाभयं दत्तं बाणस्यास्य मया प्रभो।

तत्त्वया नानृतं कार्यं यन्मया Sted वच:॥४३॥

अस्मत्संश्रयवृद्धोऽयं नापराध्यस्तवाव्यय।

मया दन्तवरो दैत्यस्ततस्त्वां क्षामयाम्यहम्॥४४॥

“Krsna, Krsna, lord of the world,’ I know
you, first of spirits, the supreme lord, infinite
felicity, without beginning or end, and beyond
all things. This sport of universal being, in
which you take the persons of god, animals,
and men, is a subordinate attribute of thy
energy. Be propitious therefore, O lord, unto
me. I have given Bana assurance of safety; do
not you falsify that which I have spoken. He
has grown old in devotion to me; let him not
incur thy displeasure. The Daitya has received

505

a boon from me, and therefore I deprecate thy
wrath.”

पराशर उवाच

इत्युक्त: We गोविन्द: शूलपाणिमुमापतिम्।

प्रसन्नवदनो भूत्वा गतामर्षोऽसुरं wet ise

When he क्त concluded, Govinda.
dismissing his resentment against the Asura,
looked graciously .on the lord of Uma, the
wielder of the trident, and said to him,

श्रीभगवानुवाच
युष्महत्तवरो SUN जीवतामेष FIST
त्वद्वाक्यगौरवादेतन्मया चक्रं निवर्तितम् ॥४६॥
मत्तोऽविभिन्नमात्मानं द्रष्टुमर्हसि PET Ol
चोऽहं त्वं जगच्चेदं सदेवासुरमानुषम्।
अविद्यामोहितात्मान: पुरुषा भिन्नदर्शिन: ॥४८॥
इत्युक्ता प्रययौ Hor: प्राद्युम्निर्यत्र तिष्ठित।

तद्बन्धफणिनो नेशुर्गरुडानिलभीषिता:॥४९॥

ततोऽनिरुद्धमारोप्य सपत्नीकं गरुत्मति।

आजग्मुंर्द्धरकां रामकाष्णिदामोदरा: पुरीम्।। ५०॥

इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चामांशे wafer: अध्याय:।

"Since you, Sankara, have given a boon
unto Bana, Let him live, from respect to your
promises, my discus is arrested: the assurance
of safety granted by you is granted also by me.
You are fit to apprehend that you are not
distinct from me. That which I am, you are;
and that also is this world, with its gods,
demons, and mankind. Men contemplate
distinctions, became they are scupified by
ignorance." So saying, Krsna went to the place
where the son of Pradyumna was confined.
The snakes that bound him were destroyed,
being blasted by the breath of Garuda: and Krs
na, placing him, along with his wife, upon the
celestial bird, returned with Pradyumna and
Rama to Dvaraka.>
NOTES

1. The synonyms of Sonitapura in the Trikanda
Sesa are Devikota, Banapur, Kotivarsam, and Us
