BOOK I, CHAP. 2

things here exist; and who is thence named
Vasudeva'’? He is Brahma,'' supreme, lord,
eternal, unborn, imperishable, undecaying; of
one essence; ever pure as free from defects.
He, that Brahma, was all _ things;
comprehending in his own nature the
indiscreet and discrcte, He then existed in the
forms of Purusa and of K4la. Purusa (spirit) is
the first form of the supreme; next proceeded
two other forms, the discrete and indiscrete;
and Kala (time) was the last. These four—
Pradhana (primary or crude matter), Purusa
(spirit), Vyakta (visible substance), and Kala
(time)—the wise consider to be the pure and
supreme condition of Visnu.!’These four
forms, in their due proportions, are the causes
of the production of the phenomena of
creation, preservation, and destruction. Visnu
being thus discrete and indiscrete substance,
spirit, and time, sports like a playful boy, as
you shall learn by listening to his frolics.’

अव्यक्तं कारणं यत् तत् प्रधानमृषिसत्तमै:।
प्रोच्यते wate: सूक्ष्मा Fret सदसदात्मकम्।। १९॥
अक्षय्यं नान्यदाधारममेयमजरं ध्रुवम्।
शब्दस्पर्शविहीनं ae रूपादिभिरसंहितम्। २०॥
त्रिगुणं तज्जगद्योनिरनादिप्रभवाप्ययम्।

तेनाग्रे सर्वमेवासीद् व्याप्तं वै प्रलयादनु।। २ gH
वेदवादविदो विद्वन्नियता ब्रह्मवादिन:।

पठन्ति वै तमेवार्थं प्रधानप्रतिपादकम्।। २ २॥

That chief principle (Pradhana), which is
the indiscrete cause, is called by the sages also
Prakrti (nature): it is subtile, uniform, and
comprehends what is and what is not (or both
causes and effects); is durable, self-sustained,
illimitable, undecaying, and stable; devoid of
sound or touch, and possessing neither colour
nor form; endowed with the three qualities (in
equilibrium); the mother of the world; without
beginning; and that into which all that is
produced is resolved.'* By that principle all
things were invested in the period subsequent
to the last dissolution of the universe, and
prior to creation’®. For Brahmanas learned in

7

the Vedas, and teaching truly their doctrines,
explain such passages as the following as
intending the production of the chief principle
(Pradhana).

नाहो न रात्रिर्न नभो न भूमि-

anit ज्योतिरभून्न चान्यत्।
श्रोतादिबुद्ध्यानुपलभ्यमेकं

प्रधानिकं Ta पुमांस्तदासीत्।। २३॥
विष्णो: स्वरूपात् परतो हि तेऽन्ये

BU wart पुरुषश्च विप्र।
wale Asa ga वियुक्ते

रूपान्तरं यत् तद् द्विज कालसंज्ञम्।। २४॥
प्रकृतो संस्थितं व्यक्तमतीतप्रलये तु यत्।
तस्मात् प्राकृतसंज्ञोऽयमुच्यते प्रतिसंचर:।। २५॥
अनादिर्भगवान् कालो नान्तोऽस्य द्विज विद्यते।
अव्युच्छिन्नास्ततस्त्वेते सर्गस्थित्यन्तसंयमा:।। २६॥
गुणसाम्ये ततस्तस्मिन् पृथक् पुंसि व्यवस्थिते।
कालस्वरूपरूपं त्तद् विष्णोर्मैत्रेय ata
कालस्वरूपं तद्विष्णोर्मैत्रेय परिवर्त्तते॥ २७॥
ततस्तत्परमं Tel परमात्मा जगन्मय:।
सर्वग: Way: सर्वात्मा WAIT २८॥
wert पुरुषञ्चापि प्रविश्यात्मेच्छया हरि:।
क्षोभयामास WNT सर्गकाले व्ययाव्ययौ।। २९॥
यथा सन्निधिमात्रेण गन्ध: क्षोभाय जायते।
मनसो Aree तथासौ परमेश्वर:।॥ ३०॥
स एव क्षोभको ब्रह्मन् क्षोभश्च पुरुषोत्तम:।
स सङ्कोचविकाशाभ्यां प्रधानत्वेऽपि च स्थिति:। ३ १।
विकाराणुस्वरूपैश्च ब्रह्मरूपादिभिस्तथा।
व्यक्तस्वरूपश्च तथा विष्णु: सर्वेश्चरेश्वर:।। ३ २॥

"There was neither day nor night, nor sky
nor earth, nor darkness nor light, nor any other
things, save only One, unapprehensible by
intellect, or That which is Brahma and Puman
(spirit) and Pradhana (matter)"'. The two
forms which are other than the essence of
unmodified Visnu, are Pradhéna (matter) and

Purusa (spirit); and his other form, by which
those two are connected or separated, is called
