246

THE VISNU-PURANAM

As gold is one substance still, however
diversified as bracelets, tiaras or earrings, so
Hari is one and the same, although modified in
the forms of gods, animals and man. As the
drops of water, raised by wind from the earth,
sink into the earth again when the wind
subsides, so the varieties of gods, men and
animals, which have been detached by the
agitation of the qualities, are reunited, when
that disturbance ceases, with the eternal. He
who through holy knowledge diligently adores
the lotus foot of that Hari, who is reverenced
by the gods, is released from all the bonds of
sin; and you must avoid him as you would
avoid fire fed with oil."

इति यमवचनं निशम्य पाशी
यमपुरुषस्तमुवाच धर्मराजम्।
कथय मम विभो? समस्तधातु-
र्भवति हरे: खलु BEMIS भक्त:॥१९॥
"Having heard these injunctions of Yama,
the messenger addressed the lord of
righteousness and said, "Tell me, master, how

am I to distinguish the worshipper of Hari,
who is the protector of all beings?"

यम sara

न चलति निजवर्णधर्मतो a:

सममतिरात्मसुहृद् विपक्षपक्षे।

न हरति न च हन्ति किञ्चिदुच्चै:

सितमनसं arate विष्णुभक्तम्॥ २०॥

Yama replied, "You are to consider the
worshipper of Visnu, him who never deviates
from the duties prescribed to his caste; who
looks with equal indifference upon friend or
enemy; who takes nothing (that is not his
own), nor injures any being. Know that person
of unblemished mind to be a worshipper of
Visnu.

कलिकलुषमलेन यस्य नात्मा
विमलमतेर्मलिनीकृतोऽस्तमोहे।
मनसि कृतजनार्दनं मनुष्यं
सततमवैहि हरेरतीव भक्तम्॥ २१॥

Know him to be a devout worshipper of
Hari, who has placed Janardana in his pure
mind, which has been freed from fascination
and whose soul is undefiled by the soil of the
Kali age.

कनकमपि रहस्यवेक्ष्य बुद्ध्या

तृणमिव a: समवैति वै परस्वम्।
भवति च भगवत्यनन्यचेता:

पुरुषवरं तमवेहि विष्णुभक्तम्।। २ २॥

Know that excellent man to be a
worshipper of Visnu, who, looking upon
golden secret, holds that which is another's
wealth but as grass and devotes all his
thoughts to the lord.

स्फटिकगिरिशिलामल: क्व विष्णु-

tata gut aa च मत्सरादिदोष:।
न f तुहिनमयूखरश्मिपुञ्जे

भवति हुताशनदीप्तिज: प्रताप:॥२३॥
विमलमतिविमत्सर: प्रशान्त

शुचिचरितोऽखिलसत्त्वमित्रभूत:।
प्रियहितवचनोऽस्तमानमायो-

वसति सदा Efe तस्य वासुदेव:॥२४॥

Pure is he as a mountain of clear crystal;
for how can Visnu abide in the hearts of men
with malice and envy and other evil passions?
The glowing heat of fire abides not in a cluster
of the cooling rays of the moon. He who lives
pure in thought, free from malice, contented,
leading a holy life, feeling tenderness for all
creatures, speaking wisely and kindly, humble
and sincere, has Vasudeva ever present in his
heart.

वसति हृदि सनातने च तस्मिन्

भवति पुमान् जगतोऽस्य सौम्यरूप:।
क्षितिरसमतिरम्यमात्मनोऽन्त:

कथयति चरुतयैव शालपोत:॥ २५॥
यमनियमविधूतकल्मषाणा-

मनुदिनमच्युतसक्तमानसानाम्।

त्यज We! दूरतरेण मानवानाम्।। २६॥
