262

THE VISNU-PURANAM

तस्मादतिथिपूजायां यतेत सततं नर:।
a केवलमघं भुङ्क्ते यो भुङ्क्ते ह्यातिथिं विना॥६८॥

O king, "A householder should also at the
perpetual Sraddha entertain —_ another
Braéhmana, who is of his own country, whose
family and observances are known and who
performs the five sacramental rites. He is
likewise to present to a Brahmana learned in
the Vedas four handfuls of food, set apart with
the exclamation Hanta; and he is to give to a
mendicant religious student three handfuls of
rice or according to his pleasure when he has
ample means. These, with the addition of the
mendicant before described, are to be
considered as guests; and he who treats these
four descriptions of persons with hospitality
acquits himself of the debt due to his fellow
men. The guest who departs disappointed from
any house and proceeds elsewhere, transfers
his sins to the owner of that mansion and takes
away with him such a householder's merits.
Brahma, Prajapati, Indra, firc, the Vasus, the
sun, are present in the person of a guest and
partake of the food that is given to him. Let a
man therefore be assiduous in discharging the
duties of hospitality; for he who eats his food
without bestowing any upon a guest feeds only
upon iniquity.

तत: Garterig -fanftuitggarcrart
भोजेयेत् संस्कृतान्नेन प्रथमं चरमं गृही॥६९॥

अभुक्तवत्सु चैतेषु भुञ्जन् get fe दुष्कृतम्।
मृतश्च AT TAT श्लेष्मभुग् जायते नर:॥७०॥
अस्नाताशी मलं भुङ्क्ते ह्यजपी पूयशोणितम्।
असंस्कवृतान्नभुङ् मूत्रं बालादिप्रथमं शकृत्॥७१॥
(अहोमी च कृमीन् भुङ्क्ते अदत्त्वा विषमश्नुते।)

"In the next place the householder must
provide food for a married damsel, remaining
in her father's dwelling; for any one who is ill;
for a pregnant woman; for the aged and the
infants of his house; and then he may eat
himself. He who eats while these are yet unfed
is guilty of sin in this life and when he dies is

condemned in hell to feed upon phlegm. So he
who eats without performing ablutions is fed
in hell with filth; and he who repeats not his
prayers, with matter and blood: he who eats
unconsecrated food, with urine; and he who
eats before the children and the rest are fed is
stuffed in Tartaurs with ordure.

तस्माच्छणुष्व WHR! यथा भुञ्जीत वै गृही।
भुञ्जतश्च तथा पुंस: पापबन्धो न जायते।॥७२॥

इह चारोग्यमतुलं बलवृद्धिस्तथा FT!
भवत्यनिष्टशान्तिश्च वैरिपक्षाभिचारिका॥७३॥
स्नातो यथावत् कृत्वा च देवर्षिपितृतर्पणम्।
प्रशस्तरत्नपाणिस्तु भुञ्जीत प्रयतो गृही।।७४॥
कृतजाप्यो हुते वह्नौ शुद्धवस्त्रथरो नृप।
दत्त्वातिथिभ्यो विप्रेभ्यो गुरुभ्य: संथ्रिताय च॥७५॥
FORE: शस्तमाल्यधारी नरेश्वर।

Hear therefore, oh kings of kings, how a
householder should feed, so that in eating no
sin may be incurred, that invariable health and
increased vigour may be secured and all evils
and hostile machinations may be averted. Let
the householder, having bathed and offered
libations to the gods and manes and decorated
his hand with jewels, proceed to take his meal,
after having repeated the introductory prayers
and offered oblations with fire and having
given food to guests, to Brahmanas, to his
elders and to his family.

नैकवस्त्रीधरोऽथार्द्रपाणिपादो महीपते॥७६॥

विशुद्ध्वदन: प्रीतो भुञ्जीत न विदिङ्मुख:।
प्राङ्मुखोदङ्मुखो वापि न चैवान्यमना नृप।।७७॥

अन्नं प्रशस्तं पथ्यं च प्रोक्षितं प्रोक्षणोदकै:।

न कुत्सिताहतं tar जुगुप्सावदसंस्कृतम्।। ७८॥

He must not eat with a single garment on,
nor with wet hands and feet, but dressed in
clean clothes, perfumed and wearing garlands
of flowers : he must not eat with his face to
any intermediate point of the horizon, but
fronting the east or the north : and thus, with a
smiling countenance, happy and attentive, let
him partake of food, of good quality,
