BOOK V, CHAP. 6

मार्गा बभूवुरस्पष्टा नवशस्यचयाव्रृता:।
अर्थान्तरमनुप्राप्ता: प्रजडानामिवोक्तय:।। ४४॥

Then came on the season of the rains, when
the atmosphere laboured with accumulated
clouds and the quarters of the horizon were
blended into one by the driving showers. The
waters of the rivers rose and overflowed their
banks and spread beyond all bounds, like the
minds of the weak and wicked transported
beyond restraint by sudden prosperity. The
pure radiance of the moon was obscured by
heavy vapours, as the lessons of holy writ are
darkened by the arrogant scoffs of fools (and
unbelievers). The bow of Indra held its place
in the heavens all unstrung, like a worthless
man elevated by an injudicious prince to
honour. The white line of storks appeared
upon the back of the cloud, in such contrast as
the bright conduct of a man of respectability
opposes to the behaviour of a scoundrel. The
ever-fitful lightning, in its new alliance with
the sky, was like the friendship of a profligate
for a man of worth. Overgrown by the
spreading grain, the paths were indistinctly
traced, like the speech of the ignorant, that
conveys no positive meaning.

उन्मत्तशिखिसारङ्गे तस्मिन् काले महावने।
कृष्ण-रामौ-मुदा युक्तौ गोपालैश्चेरतु: सह॥४५॥
क्वचिद् tht: ad रम्यं गेयनृत्यरतावुभौ।

चेरतु: क्वचिदत्वर्थं शीतव्रक्षतलाश्रयौ।।४६॥
क्वचित् कदम्बस्रक्-चित्रो मयूरस्रग्धरौ क्वचित्।
विचित्रौ क्वचिदास्येतां विविधैर्गिरिधातुभि:॥४७॥
क्वचिंद् Tafa जीमूते हाहाकाररवाद्दतौ॥४८॥
जायतामन्यगोपानां प्रशंसापरमौ क्वचित्।
भयूरकेकानुगतौ गोपवेणुप्रवादकौ।। ४९॥

At this time Krsna and Rama, accompanied
by the cow-boys, traversed the forests, that
echoed with the hum of bees and the pea-
cock’s cry. Sometimes they sang in chorus or
danced together; sometimes they sought
shelter from the cold beneath the trees;

429

sometimes they decorated themselves with
flowery garlands, sometimes with peacocks’
feathers; sometimes they stained themselves of
various hues with the minerals of the
mountain; sometimes weary they reposed on
beds of leaves and sometimes they excited
their juvenile associates to sing and sometimes
they mimicked the cry of the peacock with
their pipes.

इति नानाविधैर्भावैरुत्तमप्रीतिसंयुतौ।

क्रीडासक्तौ वने तस्मिन् चरेतु: प्रीतमानसौ।। ५०॥

विकाले तु समं गोभिर्गोपव्रन्दसमन्वितौ।

आजग्मतु: कृष्ण-बलौ गोपवेशधरावुभौ॥ ५ १॥

विकाले च यथाजोषं ब्रजमेत्य महाबालौ।

mht: समानै: सहितौ चिक्रीडातेऽमराविव॥ ५ २॥

In this manner participating in various
feelings and emotions and affectionately
attached to each other, they wandered,
sporting and happy, through the wood. At
evening tide came Krsna and Balarama, like
two cow-boys, along with the cows and the
cowherds. At evening tide the two immortals,
having come to the cow-pens, joined heartily
in whatever sports amused the sons of the
herdsmen.

NOTES

1. The Bhagavata describes Garga’s interview
with Nanda and the inducements of the latter to
keep the former’s celebration of the Sanskaras or
initiatory rites of the two boys, secret from the
Gopas. Garga there describes himself as the
Purohita or family priest, of the Yadavas.

2. The Ulakhala or mortar is a large wooden
bowl on a solid stand of timber, both cut out of one
piece; the pestle is also of wood; and they are used
chiefly for bruising or threshing unwinnowed corm
and separating the chaff from the grain. As
important agents in household economy, they are
regarded as sacred, and cven hynincd in the Vedas.

3. Our text. and that of the Hari Varhga, take no
notice of the legend of Nalakubera and Manigriva,
sons of Kubera, who, according to the Bhagavata,
had been metamorphosed, through a curse of
Narada, into these two trees and for whose
liberation this feat of Krsna was intended.
