204

THE VISNU-PURANAM

eight pale-coloured horses, travels from sign
to sign in the period of a year : and the tardy-
paced Sani (Saturn) moves slowly along in a
car drawn by piebald steeds. Eight black
horses draw the dusky chariot of Rahu, and
once harnessed are attached to it for ever. On
the Parvas (the nodes, or lunar and solar
eclipses), Rahu directs his course from the sun
to the moon, and back again from the moon to
the sun.° The eight horses of the chariot of
Ketu are of the dusky red colour of Lac, or the
smoke of burning straw.

एते मया ग्रहाणां वै तवाख्याता रथा नव।

wa ge महाभाग। प्रवद्धा वायुरश्मिभि:।॥ २४॥
ग्रहर्क्षताराधिष्णानि gat बद्धान्यशेषत:।
भ्रमन्त्युचितचारेण मैत्रेयानिलरश्मिभि:। २५॥

यावत्यश्चैव तारास्तास्तावन्तो वातरश्मय:।
aed ga निबद्धास्ते भ्रमन्तो भ्रामयन्ति तम्॥ २६॥
Tarte यथा चक्रं भ्रमन्तो भ्रामयन्ति वै।
तथा भ्रमन्ति ज्योतींषि वाताविद्धानि सर्वश:।॥ २७॥
अलातचक्रवद् यान्तिं वातचक्रेरितानि तु।

यस्माज्ज्योतींषि वहति प्रवहस्तेन स स्मृत:।। २८॥

I have thus described to you, Maitreya, the
chariots of the nine planets, all which are
fastened to Dhruva by aerial cords. The orbs of
all the planets, asterisms, and stars are
attached to Dhruva, and travel accordingly in
their proper orbits, being kept in their places
by their respective bands of air. As many as
are the stars, so many are the chains of air that
secure them to Dhruva; and as they turn round,
they cause the pole-star also to revolve. In the
same manner as the oil-man himself, going
round, causes the spindle to revolve, so the
planets travel round, suspended by cords of
air, which are circling round a (whirling)
centre. The air, which is called Pravaha, is so
termed because it bears along the planets,
which turn round, like a disc of fire, driven by
the aerial wheel.°

शिशुमारस्तु य: प्रोक्त: स gat aa तिष्ठति।
सन्निवेशञ्च तस्यापि शृणुष्व मुनिसत्तम। २९॥

यदह्ना कुरुते पापं तं apr निशि मुच्यते।
यावत्यश्चैव तारास्ता: शिशुमाराश्रिता दिवि।
तावन्त्येव तु वर्षाणि जीवत्यभ्यधिकानि च। ३ ०॥
उत्तानपादस्तस्याथ विज्ञेयोह्युत्तरो हनु:।
यज्ञोऽधरश्च विज्ञेयो धर्मो मूर्द्धनमाश्रित:॥३ १॥
हृदि नारायणश्नास्ते अश्विनौ पूर्वपादयो:।
aang da पश्चिमे wer सक्थिनी॥ ३ २॥
शिश्न: संवत्सरस्तस्य मित्रोऽपानं समाश्रित:।
पुच्छेऽग्निश्च महेन्द्रश्च कश्यपोऽथ ततो ga:
तारकाशिशुमारस्य नास्तमेति चतुष्टयम्॥३३॥

The celestial porpoise, in which Dhruva is
fixed, has been mentioned, but you shall hear
its constituent parts in more detail, as it is of
great efficacy; for the view of it at night
expiates whatever sin has been committed
during the day; and those who behold it live as
many years as there are stars in it, in the sky,
or even more. Uttanapada is to be considered
as its upper jaw; Sacrifice as its lower.
Dharma is situated on its brow; Narayana in its
heart. The Asvins are its two fore feet; and
Varuna and Aryamat its two hinder legs.
Samvatsara is its sexual organ; Mitra its organ
of excretion. Agni, Mahendra, KaSyapa, and
Dhruva, in succession are placed in its tail;
which four stars in this constellation never
set.’

इत्येष सन्निवेशोऽयं पृथिव्या ज्योतिषां तथा।
द्वीपानामुदधीनाञ्ज पर्वतानाञ्च कीर्तित:।॥ ३४॥
वर्षाणाञ्च नदीनाञ्च ये च ay वसन्ति वै।

तेषां स्वरूपमाख्यातं GAT: श्रूयतां पुन:।।३५॥

I have now described to you the disposition
of the earth and of the stars; of the insular
zones, with their oceans and mountains, their
Varsuas or regions, and their inhabitants; their
nature has also been explained, but it may be
briefly recapitulated.

यदम्बु वैष्णव: कायस्ततो far! वसुन्धरा।
पद्माकारा समुद्धूता पर्वताळ्यादिसंयुता।। ३ ६॥
aah विष्णुर्गिरयो दिशश्च।
