३३2

THE VISNU-PURANAM

passion for the nymph Urvasi, the sage was
born again in a different shape. The corpse of
Nimi was preserved from decay by being
embalmed with fragrant oils and resins and it
remained as entire as if it were immortal.”

यज्ञसमाप्तौ च भागग्रहणायागतान् देवान् ऋत्विज ऊचु:
यजमानाय वरो दीयतामिति। देवैश्छन्दितो निमिराह। ८॥
भगवन्तोऽखिलसंसारदु:खसङ्घातस्य च्छेत्तार:)। न

ततोफू।त्युन्येषमिपेषचत्रुत्र् nen

When the sacrifice was concluded, the
priests applied to the gods, who had come to
receive their portions, that they would confer a
blessing upon the author of the sacrifice. The
gods were willing to restore him to bodily life,
but Nimi declined its acceptance, saying, “O
deities, who are the alleviators of all worldly
suffering, there is not in the world a deeper
cause of distress than the separation of soul
and body; it is therefore my wish to dwell in
the eyes of all beings, but never more to
resume a corporeal shape!" To this desire the
gods assented and Nimi was placed by them in
the eyes of all living creatures; in consequence
of which their eyelids are ever opening and
shutting.

अपुत्रस्य च तस्य we: शरीरमराजकभीरवस्ते
मुनयोऽरण्यां WARY: Voll

TA कुमारो AN, जननाञ्जनकसंज्ञाञ्जासाववाप॥ ११॥

As Nimi left no successor, the Munis,
apprehensive of the consequences of the earth
being without a ruler, agitated the body of the
prince and produced from it a prince who was
called Janaka, from being born without a
progenitor.

अभूद् विदेहोऽस्य पितेति वैदेहो मथनान्मिथिरभूत्।
तस्योदावसु: FIT ततो नन्दिबर्द्धन तस्मात् सुवेग्त्तु
तस्यापि सत्यधृति:, ततश्चघृ'ष्टवेभ्त्तु:, धृष्टकेतोर्हर्य्यश्च:, तस्य

‘the son of the bodiless;'

च मरु: WU: प्रतिब्धक:, TaN, कृतरथ: तस्मात्
कृति:) wa विबुध:, तस्यापि महाधृति:, तस्य च
कृतिरात: ततो महारोमा, aa: सुवर्णरोमा, तस्यापि पुत्रो
seta, तत: सीरध्वजोऽभूत्। तस्य gad यजनभुवं
aaa: सीरे सीता दुहिता समुत्पन्नासीत्। सीरध्वजस्य भ्राता
साङ्काश्याधिपतिर कुशध्वजनामा सीरध्वजस्यापत्यं
भानुमान्। १२॥

In consequence of his father being without
a body (videha), he was termed also Vaideha,
and he further
received the name of Mithi, from having been
produced by agitation (mathana)’. The son of
Janaka was Udavasu; his son was
Nandivarddhana; his son was Suketu; his son
was Devarata; his son was Brhaduktha; his son
was Mahavirya; his son was Satyadhrti; his
son was Dhrstaketu; his son was Haryyasva;
his son was Maru; his son was Pratibandhaka;
his son was Krtaratha; his son was Krta; his
son was Vibudha; his son was Mahadhrti; his
son was Krtirata; his son was Maharoman; his
son was Suvarnaroman; his son was
Hrasvaroman; his son was _ Siradhvaja.
Siradhvaja ploughing the ground, to prepare it
for a sacrifice which he instituted in order to
obtain progeny, there sprang up in the furrow a
damsel, who became his daughter Sita.* The
brother of Siradhvaja was Kusadhvaja, who
was king of Kasi’ : he had a son also, named
Bhanumat.°

भानुमत: शतद्युम्न:, तस्य शुचि: तस्मादूर्वहो नाम पुत्रो
Wal तस्यापि सत्यध्वज: (१), तत: कुनि: (क्रूणि:)
Wa: सूर्य्यश्व:, TaN सञ्जय: (सन्नय:), aa: क्षेमारि:
त्तस्मादनेना:, तस्मान्मीनरथ: (मानरथ:), तस्य सत्यरथ:),
TS सात्यरथि:, सात्यरथेरुपगु: तस्मात् श्रुत: (उपगुप्त:),
तस्मात् शाश्वत:, तस्मात् सुधन्वा (सुवर्चा:),
सुभास:, तत: सुश्रुत:, तस्माज्जय: जयपुत्रो विजय: wea
ऋत:, ऋतात् सुनय: ततो वीतहव्य:, तस्मात् सञ्जय:
Teg (क्षेमाश्व:, तस्मात्) धृति:, धृतेर्बहुलाश्व: Tear GA:
+, la: कृतौ सन्तिष्ठतेऽयं जनक-वंश:।। १३॥
