196

19. These are the names of the months which
occur in the Vedas, and belong to a system now
obsolete, as was noticed by Jones. As. Res. III. 258.
According to the classification of the text, they
correspond severally with the lunar months Magha,
Phalguna, Caitra, Vaisakha. Jyestha, Asardha, or
from December to June; and with Sravana Bhadra,
Asvina, Kartika, Agrahayana, and Pausa, from July
to December. From this order of the two series of
the months, as occurring in the Vedas, Colebrooke
infers, upon astronomical computations, their date
to be about fourteen centuries prior to the Christian
era. As. Res. VII. 283.

20. The Vayu has the same names, but ascribes a
different descent to the first, making Sudhaman the
son of Viraja, Sankhapad is the son of Kardama:
the other two are the sons of Parjanya and Rajas,
consistently with the origin ascribed to these
Lokapalas in the patriarchal genealogies of that
Purana (see Bk. I. ch. X).

21. Allusion is hcre made to some divissions of
the celestial sphere which are not described in may
other part of the text. The fullest, but still in some
respects a confused and partly inaccurate account is
given in thc Matsya Purana; but a more satisfactory
description occurs in the comment on_ the
Bhagavata, there cited from the Vayu, but not
found in the copics consulted on the present
occasion. According to those details, the path
(Marga) of the sun and other planets amongst the
lunar asterisms is divided into three portions or
Avasthanas, northern, southern, and central, called
severally Airavata, Jaradgava (Ajagava, Matsya P.),
and Vaisvanara, Each of these, again, is divided
into thrce parts or Vithis : those of the northern
portion are termed Ndagavithi, Gajavithi, and
Airavati; those of the centre are Arsabhi, Govithi
and Jaradgavi; and those of the south are named
Ajavithi, Mrigavithi, and Vaisvanari. Each of these
Vithis comprises three asterisms.

Nagavithi : Asvint, Bharaii, Krittika.

Gajavithi : Rohini, Mrigasiras, Ardra.

Airavati : Punarvasu, Pusy4, Aslesha.

Arshabhi : Magha, Porvaphalguni,
Uttaraphalguni.

Govithi : Hasta, Chitra, Svati.

Jaradgava : Visakha, Anuradha, Jyestha.

Ajavithi : Mala, Purvashadha,
Uttarashadha.

Mrigavithi : Sravana, Dhanistha, Satabhisha.

THE VISNU-PURANAM

: Parva Bhadrapadi, Uttara
Bhadrapada, Revati.

See also As. Res. IX, table of Naksatras, 346.
Agastya is Canopus; and the line of the goat, or
Ajavithi, comprises asterisms which contain stars in
Scorpio and Sagittarius.

22. A marginal note in one MS. explains the
phrase of the text, आचन्द्रतारकं, to signify as far as to
the moon and stars; चन्द्रतारकसीमा भूतमार्गं। but the Pitri
yana, or path of the Pitrs, lies amongst the
asterisms; and, according to the Pauranik system of
the heavens, it is not clear what could be meant by
its being bounded by the moon and stars. The path
south of the solar orb is, according to the Vedas,
that of smoke or darkness.

23. The stars of the Nagavithi are those of Aries
and Taurus; and by the seven Rsis we are here to
understand Ursa Major.

24. This, according to the Vedas, is all that is to
be understood of the immortality of the gods: they
perish at the period of universal dissolution.

25. That is, generally as effecting created beings,
not individuals, whose acts influence their sevcral
successive births.

26. From Ursa Major to the polar star.

27. The popular notion is, that Siva or Mahadeva
receives the Ganga on his head; but this, an
subsequently explained, is referred, by the Vais
navas at least, to the descent of the Alakananda, or
Ganga of India, not to the celestial Ganga.

28. Or, in other words, ‘flows into the sea.’ The
legend here alluded to is more fully detailed in a
subsequent book.

29. The situation of the source of the Ganga of
heaven identifies it with the milky way.

६.ह.ढे.३

Vaisvanari
