566

THE VISNU-PURANAM

sufferings of men, and remover of all

imperfections.
इदमार्षं पुरा We BMA कमलोद्भव:।
wy: प्रियव्रतायाह स च भागुरयेऽब्रवीत्।। ४२॥
anh: स्तवमित्राय दधीचाय च चोक्तवान्।
स वै सारस्वते Were भृगु: सारस्वतादपि।। ४३॥
भृगुणा पुरुकुत्साय नर्मदायै स चोक्तवान्।
नर्मदा धृतराष्टाय नागाय पूरणाय च।। ४४॥
ताभ्याञ्च नागराजाय प्रोक्तं वासुकये द्विज!
वासुकि: प्राह वत्साय वत्सश्चाश्वतराय वै॥४५॥
कम्बलाय च तेनोक्तमेलापत्राय तेन च।

पातालं समनुप्राप्तस्ततो वेदशिरा मुनि:॥४६॥

प्राप्तवानेतदखिलं स वै प्रमतये ददौ।

ad प्रमतिना da जातूकर्णाय tat yon

वशिष्ठवरदानेन ममाप्येतत् स्मृति गतम्॥४८॥

त्वमप्येतच्छमीकाय कलेरन्ते गदिष्यसि।। ४९॥

This Purana, originally composed by the Rs
i (Narayana), was communicated by Brahma
to Rbhu; he related it to Priyavrata, by whom
it was imparted to Bhaguri. Bhaguri recited it
to Tamasitra‘, and he to Dadica, who gave it to
Sarasvata. From the last Bbrgu received it,
who imparted it to Dhrtarastra the Naga king,
and to Purana of the same race, by whom it
was repeated to their monarch Vasuki. Vasuki
communicated it to Vatsa, and he to Asvatara,
from whom it successively proceeded to
Kambala and Elapatra. When the Muni
Vedasiras descended to Patala, he there
received the whole Purana from these Nagas,
and communicated it to Pramati. Pramati
consigned it to the wise Jatukarna, and he
taught it to many other holy persons. Through
the blessings of Vasistha it came to my
knowledge, and I have now, Maitreya,
faithfully imparted it to you. You will teach it,
at the end of the Kali age, so Samika’.

इत्येतत् परमं गुह्यं कलिकल्मषनाशनम्।

a: शृणोति नर: पापै: स सर्वैर्दविज! मुच्यते।। ५०॥

पितृपक्षमनुष्येभ्य: समस्तामरसंस्तुति:।

कृता तेन भवेदेतद् य: श्वृणोति दिमे दिने।। ५१॥

श्रुत्वैतस्य दशाध्यायानवोप्नोति न संशय:।। Vl

Whoever hears this great mystery, which
removes the contamination of the Kali, shall
be freed from all his sins. He who hears this
everyday acquits himsclf of his daily
obligations to anccstors, gods and men. The
great and rarely attainable merit that a man
acquires by the gift of a brown cow, he derives
from hearing ten chapters of this Purana’.
सर्वं सर्वमयं समस्तजगता माधारमात्माश्रयम्।
स प्राप्नोति न संशयोऽस्त्यविकलं यद्वाजिमेधे फलम्।। ५३

He who hears the entire Purana,
contemplating in his mind Achyuta, who is all
things, and of whom all things are made; who
is the stay of the whole world, the receptacle
of spirit; who is knowledge, and that which is
to be known; who is without beginning or end,
and the benefactor of the gods— obtains
assuredly the reward that attends the
uninterrupted celebration of the Asvamedha
rite.

यत्रादौ भगवांश्चराचरगुरु मध्ये तथान्ते च स:,

ब्रह्मज्ञानमयोच्युतोऽखिलजगन्मध्यान्तसर्गप्रभु:।

तच्छृण्वन् पुरुष: पवित्रपरमं भक्त्या पठन् धारयन्,

प्राप्नोत्यस्ति न तत् समस्तभुवनेष्वेकान्तसिद्धिर्हरि:।। ५४॥

He who reads and retains with faith this
Purana in the beginning, middle, and end of
which is described the glorious Achyuta, the
lord of the universe in every stage, the master
of all that is stationary or moveable, composed
of spiritual knowledge, acquires such purity as
exists not in any world, the eternal state of
perfection, which is Hari.

यस्मिन्न्यस्तमतिर्न याति नरकं स्वर्गोऽपि यच्चिन्तने,
fact aa निवेशितात्ममनसो ब्राह्मोऽपि लोकोऽल्पक:।
