BOOK VI, CHAP. 8

565

oceans, the subterrene legions, the division of receives the reward of an uninterrupted

the earth, and all perceptible objects~ he who
is all things, who knows all things, who is the
form of all things, being without form himself,
and of whom whatever is, from mount Meru to
an atom, all consists— he, the glorious Visnu,
the destroyer of all sin— is described in this
Purana.

यदश्वमेधावभृथे स्नात: प्राप्नोति वै फलम्।

सकलं तदवापनोति श्रुत्वैतन्मुनिसत्तम।। २८॥

प्रयागे पुष्करे चैव HET तथार्बुदे।

कृतोपवास: WN तदस्य श्रवणान्नर:।। २९॥

By hearing this Purana an _ equal
recompense is obtained to that which is
derived from the performance of an
Asvamedha sacrifice, or from fasting at the
holy places Prayaga, Puskara Kuruksetra, or
Arbuda.

यदग्निहोत्रे सुहुते वर्षेणाप्नोति वै फलम्।

सकलं समवाप्नोति तदस्य श्रवणात् AHI ३ ol
यज्ज्यैष्ठशुकुद्वादश्यां स्नात्वा वै नियतेन्द्रिय:।
मथुरायां हरिं दृष्ट्वा प्राप्नोति परमां गतिम्।। ३ १॥
तदाप्नोति फलं सम्यक् समाधानेन SHAT
पुराणस्यास्य fart! केशवार्पितमानस:॥ ३ २॥

Hearing this Purana but once is as
efficacious as the offering of oblations in a
perpetual fire for a year. The man who with
well-governed passions bathes at Mathura on
the twelfth day of the month Jyestha‘’, and
beholds (the image of) Hari, obtains a great
recompense; so does he who with mind fixed
upon Kc§ava attentively recites this Purana.

अश्वमेधस्य यज्ञस्य Weeaaaet फलम्।। 3 3 1

यमुनासलिले स्नात: पुरुषो मुनिसत्तम।

ज्येष्ठामूलेऽमले पक्षे द्वादश्यामुपवासकृत्।। ३४॥

The man who bathes in the waters of the
Yamun4 on the twelfth lunation of the light
fortnight of the month in which the moon is in
the mansion Jyestha, and who fasts and
worships Acyuta in the city of Mathura,

ASvamedha.
रोक्यद्धिमथान्येषामन्नीतानां स्ववंशजै।

wad किलोचुरन्येषां पितर: सपितामहा:॥ ३५॥

कश्चिदस्मत्कुले जात: कालिन्दीसलिलाप्लुत:।

अर्च्चयिष्यति गोविन्दं मथुरायामुपोषित:॥ ३६॥

ज्येष्ठामूले सिते पक्षे येनैवं वयमप्युत।

पर।मृ।द्धैमवास्थि।मस्त।रिंता: स्वकुलं।द्भवै:||३७||

Beholding the degree of prosperity enjoyed
by others of eminence, through the merits of
the descendants, a man’s paternal ancestors,
his parents and their parents exclaim,
“Whosoever of our descendants, having
bathed in the Yamuna and fasted, will worship
Govinda in Mathura, in the light fortnight of
Jyestha, will secure for us eminent exaltation:
for we shall be elevated by the merits of our
posterity!”

ज्येष्ठामूले fad wat Weed जनार्द्दनम्।

धन्यानां कुलज: पिण्डान् यमुनायां प्रदास्यति।। ३ ८॥

A man of good extraction will present
obsequial cakes to his fortunate ancestors in
the Yamuna, having worshipped Janardana in
the light fortnight of Jyestha.

afar काले Unaed तत्र कृष्णं समाहित:।

दत्त्वा पिण्डान् पितृभ्यश्च यमुनासलिलाप्लुत:।। ३ 8

यदाप्नोति नर: पुण्यं तारयन् स पितामहान्।

श्रुत्वाध्यायं तदाप्नोति पुराणस्यास्य भक्तिमान् ॥४०॥

`एतत् संसारभीरूणां परित्राणमनुत्तमम्।

दु:स्वप्नाशनं नृणां सर्वदुष्टनिवर्हणम्।। ४ १॥

But the same degree of merit that a man
reaps from adoring Janarddana at the season
with a devoted heart, and from bathing in the
Yamuna, and effecting the liberation of his
progenitors by offering to them on such an
occasion obsequial cakes, he derives also from
hearing with equal devotion a section of this
Purana. This Purana is the best of all

preservatives for those who are afraid of
worldly existence, a certain alleviation of the
