BOOK V, CHAP. 9

437

themselves with garlands of forest flowers,
they looked like two young bulls when the
horns first appear. Attired thé one in yellow
and the other in sable garments, they looked
like two clouds, one white and one black,
surmounted by the bow of Indra. Sporting
mutually with frolics beneficial to the world,
they roamed about like two monarchs over all
the collected sovereigns of the earth.
Assuming human duties and maintaining the
human character, they strayed through the
thickets amusing themselves with sports suited
to their mortal species and condition, in
swinging on the boughs of trees or in boxing
and wrestling and hurling stones.

तल्लिप्सुरसुरस्तत्र ह्युभयो रममाणयो:।

आजगाम प्रलम्बाख्यो गोपवेशतिरोहित:॥९॥

सोऽवगाहत् नि:शङ्कस्तेषां मध्यममानुष:।

मानुषं वपुरास्थाय प्रलम्बो दानवोत्तम:॥१०॥

तयोश्छिद्रान्तरं प्रेप्सुरविषह्यममन्यत।

कृष्णं ततो रौहिणेयं हन्तु चक्रे मनोरथम्।। ११॥

हरिणाक्रीडनं AM बालक्रीडनकं तत:।

प्रकुर्वन्तो fe ते aed द्वौ द्वौ युगपदुत्पतन्॥१२॥

Having observed the two lads thus playing
about, the Asura Pralamba, seeking to devour
them, came amongst the cowherd boys in the
shape of one of themsclves and mixed, without
being suspected, in their pastimes; for he
thought, that, thus disguised, it would not be
difficult to find an opportunity to kill, first Krs
na and afterwards the son of Rohini. The boys
commenced playing at the game of leaping
like deer, two and two together.!

श्रीदाम्नां सह गोविन्द: प्रलम्बेन तथा बल:।

भोपालैरपरैश्चान्ये गोपाला: पुप्लुवुस्तत:॥१३॥

श्रीदामानं तत: कृष्ण: प्रलम्बं रोहिणीसुत:।

जितवान् कृष्णपक्षीयैर्गोपैरन्ये पराजिता:॥१४॥

a वाहयन्तस्वन्योन्यं भाण्डीरस्कन्धमेत्य वै।

पुनर्निववृतु: सर्वे ये यैश्चात्र पराजिता:।१५॥

Govinda was matched with Sridaman and
Balarama with Pralamba : the other boys were

coupled with one another and went leaping
away. Govinda beat his companion and
Balarama his; and the boys who were on Krs
na’s side were also victorious. Carrying one
another, they reached the Bhandira fig; and
from thence those who were victors were
conveyed back to the starling-ground by those
who were vanquished.

सङ्कर्षणन्तु स्कन्धेन शीघ्रमुत्झिप्य दानव:।

न तस्थौ स जगामैव सचन्द्र Sa वारिद:॥ १६॥

असहन् रौहिणेयस्य स भारं दानवोत्तम:।

aga सुमहाकाय: Weds बलाहक:।॥ Vout

सङ्कर्षणस्तु तं दृष्ट्वा दग्धशैलोपमाकृतिम्।

स्रग्दामलम्बाभरणं मुकुटाटोपमस्तकम्॥ १८॥

ह्रियमाणस्तत: कृष्णमिदं वचनमब्रवीत्॥१९॥

कृष्ण! कृष्ण। ह्रियाम्येष पर्वतोदग्रमूर्तिना।

केनापि षश्य दैत्येन गोपालच्छद्मरूपिणा॥ २०॥

यदत्र साम्प्रतं are मया मधुनिषूदन।

तत् कथ्यतां प्रयात्येष दुरात्मा दानवाधम:॥ A

It being Pralamba’s duty to carry Sarhkars
ana, the latter mounted upon his shoulders,
like the moon riding above a dark cloud; and
the demon ran off with him, but did not stop :
finding himself, however, unable to bear the
weight of Balarama, he enlarged his bulk and
looked like a black cloud in the rainy season,
Balarama beholding him like a scorched
mountain, his head crowned with a diadem
and his neck hung round with garlands, having
eyes as large as cart wheels, a fearful form and
shaking the earth with his tread, called out, as
he was carried away, to his brother, ‘‘Krsna,
Krsna, I am carried off by some demon,
disguised as a cowherd and huge as a

mountain! What shall I do? Tell me,
Madhustidana : the villain runs away with
speed!”’

पराशर उवाच

महात्मा रौहिणेयस्य बलवीर्यप्रमाणवित्।। २२॥
