254

THE VISNU-PURANAM

friend of all living beings. Let him, occupied
with devotion, abstain from wrong, in act,
word or thought, to all creatures, human or
brute; and equally avoid-attachment to any.

एकरात्रस्थितिर्ग्रमे पञ्चरात्रस्थिति: पुरे।

तथा fase यथा प्रीतिर्द्दघो वा नास्य जायते॥ २८॥
प्राणयात्रानिमित्तञ्च व्यङ्गारे भुक्तवज्जने।

काले प्रशस्तवणानां भिक्षार्थं wits गृहान्॥२९॥
काम: क्रोधस्तथा दर्पमोहलोभादयश्च ये।

तांस्तु दोषान् परित्यज्य परिव्राडू निर्ममो भवेत्।। ३०॥
अभयं सर्वभूतेभ्यो दत्त्वा यश्चरते मुनि:।

तस्यापि सर्वभूतेभ्यो न भयं विद्यते sata ३ १॥।

Let him reside but for one night in a village
and not more than five nights at a time in a
city; and let him so abide, that good-will and
not animosity, may be engendered. Let him,
for the support of existence, apply for alms at
the houses of the three first castes, at the time
when the fires have been extinguished and
people have eaten. Let the wandering
mendicant call nothing his own and suppress
desire, anger, covetousness, pride and folly.
The sage who gives no cause for alarm to

living beings need never apprehend any
danger from them.

विप्रस्तु भैक्ष्योपगतैर्हविरभि-
श्चिताग्निना स व्रजति स्म लोकान्॥ ३ २॥
मोक्षाश्रमं यश्चरते यथोक्तं
शुचि: स्वसङ्कल्पितबुद्धियुक्त:।
स ब्रह्मलोकं जयति द्विजाति:।। ३ ३॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे तृतीयांऽशे नवमोऽध्याय:।॥९॥

Having deposited the sacrificial fire in his
own person, the Brahmana fecds the vital
flame, with the butter that is collected as alms,
through the altar of his mouth; and by means
of his spiritual fire he proceeds to his own

proper abode. But the twice-born men’ who
seeks for liberation and is pure of heart and
whose mind is perfected by self-investigation,
secures the sphere of Brahma, which is
tranquil and is as a bright flame that emits not

smoke."
RE

NOTES

1. These directions are the same as those
prescribed by Manu though not precisely in the
same words. II.175.

2. So Manu, III. 4,

3. The great obligations or as Jones terms them,
sacraments, the Mahayajfias or great sacrifices, are
according to Manu, but five; Brahmayajfia, sacred
study, Pitryajfia, libations to the raanes; Devayajfia,
burnt-offerings to the gods; Baliyajfia, offerings to
all creatures; and Nryaiija, hospitality. III. 70, 71.
The Prajapatiyajfia or propagation of offspring and
Satyayajfia, observance of truth, are apparently
later additions.

4. This is also the doctrine of Manu, III. 100.

5. Manu, VI. 3.

6. Manu, VI. 33.

7. The text use the term Dvijati, which
designates a man of the three first castes. The
commentator cites various authorities to prove that
its sense shouid be Brahmana only, who alone is
permitted to enter the fourth order, mhreqetis नास्ति
बाहुजोरुजयो: क्वचित्। qaiat गति: प्रोक्ता मुखजानां स्वयम्भुवेति
दत्तात्रेयोक्ते:। ब्राह्मण: प्रव्रजेद्गृहादिति यम हंवर्त्तबौधायनवचनाच्च॥
‘Entrance into the fourth order is never for the Ks
atriya and Vaisya, Entrance into the fourth order is
for Brahmanas, according to Svayarhbhu. So says
Dattétreya : "Let the Brahmana proceed from his
dwelling is also the expression of Yama, Samvartta
and Baudhdyana." But this is not the general
understanding of the law, nor was it originally so
restricted apparently. Manu does not so limit it.

RE
