194

fender; Nimeshas form its floor; a moment is the
axle-tree; an instant the pole; minutes are its
attendants; and hours its harness.

4, This-shorter axle is, according to the
Bhagavata, one fourth of the longer.

5. We are to understand here, both in the axle
and yoke, two levers, one horizontal, the other
perpendicular. The horizontal arm of the axle has a
wheel at one end; the other extremity is connected
with the perpendicular arm. To the horizontal arm
of the yoke are harnessed the horses; and its inner
or right extremity is secured to the perpendicular.
The upper ends of both perpendiculars are
supposed to be attached to Dhruva, the pole-star, by
two aerial cords, which are lengthened in the sun’s
southern course, and shortened in his norther; and
retained by which to Dhruva, as to a pivot, the
wheel of the car traverses the summit of the
Manasottara mountain on Puskara-dvipa, which
runs like a ring round the several continents and
oceans. The contrivance is commonly compared to
an oil mill, and was probably suggested by that
machine as constructed in India. As the
M§anasottara mountain is but 50,000 leagues high,
and Meru 84,000, whilst Dhruva is 1500,000, both
levers are inclined at obtuse angles to the nave of
the wheel and each other. In images of the sun, two
equal and semicircular axles connect a central
wheel with the sides of the car.

6. In the Linga the city of Indra is called
Amaravati; and in it and the Vayu that of Varuna is
termed Sukha.

7. The terms Parva and Apara mean properly
‘before and behind’; but ‘before’ naturally denotes
the east, either because men, according to a text of
the Vedas, spontaneously face, as if to welcome the
rising sun, or because they are enjoined by the laws
so to do. When they face the rising sun, the west is
of course behind them. The same circumstance
determines the application of the term Daksina,
properly ‘right’, or ‘dexterum’, to the south. Uttara,
‘other’ or ‘last’, necessarily implies the north.

8, This is rather obscure, but it is made out
clearly enough in the commentary, and in the
parrallel passages in the Vayu, Matsya, Linga,
Kiirma, and Bhagavata. The sun travels round the
world, keeping Meru always on his right ; to the
spectator who fronts him therefore, as he rises,

THE VISNU-PURANAM

Meru must be always on the north; and as the sun’s
rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of the
mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of it,
must be in darkness; whilst those on the south of it
must be in light: north and south being relative, not
absolute terms, depending upon the position of the
spectator with regard to the sun and to Meru. So the
commentator मेरुं प्रदक्षिणीकुर्व्वन्तं सूर्य्य ये यत्न wart सा च
तेषां प्राची तेषां च वामभागो मेरुरत: wedol सर्व्वदा मेरुरुत्तरत:।
तस्मादुत्तरस्यां दिशि सदा oft: दक्षिणस्यां च सदा दिनं। It was
probably through some misapprehension of this
doctrine that Wilford asserted, “by Meru the
Pauraniks understand in general the north pole, but
the context of the Puranas is against this
supposition”. As. Res.’ VIII. 286. There is no
inconsistency, however, in Meru’s being absolutely
in the centre of the world, and relatively north to
the inhabitants of the several protions, to all of
whom the east is that quarter where the sun first
appears, and the other quarters are thereby
regulated.

9. Similar notions are contained in the Vayu.

10. The sun travels at the rate of one-thirticth of
the earth’s circumference in a Muhirtta, or
31,50,000 Yojanas; making the total 9 crores and
45 lakhs, or 9,45,00,000; according to the Vayu,
Linga, and Matsya Puranas.

11. This passage, which is somewhat at
variance with the general doctrine, that the length
of the day depends upon the velocity of the sun’s
course, and which has not been noticed in any other
Paurdnik text, is defended by the commentator,
upon the authority of the Jyotis-Sastra, or
astronomical writings. According to them, he
asserts, the signs of the Zodiac are of different
extent. Aquarius, Pisces, and Aries are the shortest;
Taurus, Capricornus, and Gemini are something
longer; Leo and Scorpio longer still; and the
remaining four the longest of all. According to the
six which the sun traverses, the day or night will be
the longer or shorter. The text is,

far तथा निशायां राशीनां प्रमाणैर्लघुदीर्घता।। The
apparent contradiction may however be reconciled
by understanding the sun’s slow motion, and the
length of a sign, to be equivalent terms.

12. The same story occurs in the Vayu, with the
addition that the Mandehas are three crores in
number. It seems to be an ancient legend,
imperfectlyl preserved in some of the Puranas.
