526

THE VISNU-PURANAM

यस्माद् विश्वरूपं At ज्ञात्वा हासावमानना |

भवतीभि: FAT तस्मादेष शापं ददामि व:॥८१॥

मत्प्रसादेन Ta लब्वा तं पुरुषोत्तमम्।

मच्छापोपहता: at दस्युहंस्तं गतिष्यथ।। ८ २॥

इत्युदीरितमाकर्ण्य मुनिस्ताभि: प्रसादित:।

YA: सुरेन्द्रलोकं वै wre भूयो गमिष्यथ।। ८३1

एवं तस्य YA: शापादष्टावक्रस्य केशवम्।

WAL WT ता दस्युहस्तं याता ATA: ८४॥

तत्त्वया नात्र कर्त्तव्य: शोकोऽल्पोऽपि हि पाण्डव।

तेनैवाखिलाथेन Ws तदुपसंहृतम्॥ ८५॥

भवतां चोपसंहारमासन्नं तेन कुर्वता।

बलं तेजस्तथा वीर्यं माहात्म्यं चोपसंहतम्॥ ८ GI

‘So be it,’ replied Astavakra, and

thereupon came up from the waters. When the
nymphs beheld him coming out of the water,
and saw that he was very ugly, and crooked in
eight places, they could not restrain their
merriment, but laughed aloud. The Muni was
very angry, and cursed them, and said, ‘Since
you have been so impertinent as to laugh at
my deformity, I denounce upon you this
imprecation : through the grace I have shown

unto you, you shall obtain the first of males for
your husband; but in consequence of my curse,

you shall afterwards fall into the hands of”

thieves.” When the nymphs heard this uttered
by the Muni, they endeavoured to appease
him; and they so far succeeded, that he
announced to them they should finally return
to the sphere of the gods. It is in consequence,
then, of the curse of the Muni Astavakra that
these females, who were at first the wives of
KeSava, have now fallen into the hands of the
barbarians; and there is no occasion, Arjuna,
for you to regret it in the least. All this
destruction has been effected by the lord of all;
and your end is also nigh at hand, since he has
withdrawn from you strength, splendour,
valour, and pre-eminence.

जातस्य नियतो मृत्यु: पतनञ्च तथोन्नते:।
विप्रयोगावसानश्च संयोग: सञ्चयात् क्षय:।। ८७॥

विज्ञाय न बुधा: शोकं न हर्षमुपयान्ति ये।
तेषामेवेतरे चेष्टां शिक्षन्तं: सन्ति तादृशा:।॥ cH
TAIT AWS ज्ञात्वैत्द भ्रातृभि: सह।
परित्यज्याखिलं तन्त्रं गन्तव्यं तपसे वनम्।। ८९॥ `
aq गच्छ धर्मराजाय निवेद्यैतद्वचो मम।

परश्वो भ्रातभि: सार्द्ध यथा यासि FAT कुरु।। ९०॥

Death is the doom of every one who is
born; fall is the end of exaltation: union
terminates in separation: and growth tends but
to decay. Knowing all this, wise men are
susceptible of neither grief nor joy; and those
who learn their ways are even as they are
(equally free from pleasure or pain). Do you
therefore, most excellent prince, understand
this truth and, along with your brothers,
relinquish every thing, and repair to the holy
forest. Go now, and say from me to
Yudhisthira, that he to-morrow, with his
brethren, tread the pach of heroes.”

UN sara
इत्युक्तोऽभ्येत्य पार्थाभ्यां यमाभ्याञ्च तथार्जुन: ।
दृष्टं चैवानुभूतञ्च कथितं तेष्वशेषत:।। ९ १॥
व्यासवाक्यञ्च ते सर्वे श्रुत्वार्जुनसमीरितम्।
राज्ये परीक्षितं कृत्वा ययु: पाण्डुसुता वनम्॥९२॥

Thus instructed by Vyasa Arjuna went and
related to the other sons of Prtha all that he
had seen, and experienced, and had heard.
When he had communicated to them the
message of Vyasa, the sons of Pandu placed
Pariksit on the throne, and went to the forest.

इत्येतत् तव मैत्रेय विस्तरेण मयोदितम्।
जातस्य यद्यदोर्वंशे वासुदेवस्य चेष्टितम्॥९३॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे अष्टत्रिंश: अध्याय:।

I have thus narrated to you, Maitreya, in
detail, the action of Vasudeva, when he was
born in the race of Yadu.

hk
NOTES

1. The Mahabharata takes the wives of Krsna
first to Indraprasthé, and there Rukmini and four
others burn; but Satyabham4 and others become
ascetics, going to perform Tapasya in the forest.
