BOOK HI, CHAP, 15 7

Vaivasvata. He is then to place a very little of
the residue of the oblation in the dishes of the
Brahmanas; and next, presenting them with
choice viands, well dressed and seasoned and
abundant, he is to request them civilly to
partake of it at their pleasure. The Brahmanas
are to eat of such food I attentively, in silence,
with cheerful countenances and at their ease.
The sacrificer is to give it to them, not
churlishly, nor hurriedly, but with devout
faith.

रक्षोघ्नमन्त्रपठनं भूमेरास्तरणं तिलै:।

कृत्वा ध्येया: स्वपितरस्त Wat द्विजसत्तमा:। ३०॥

"Having next recited the prayer of the
discomfiture of malignant spirits'' and
scattered sesamum-seeds upon the ground, the
Brahmanas who have been fed are to be
addressed, in common with the ancestors of
the sacrificer, in this manner:

पिता पितामहश्चैव तथैव प्रपितामह:।
मम तृप्तिं प्रयान्त्वग्निहोमाप्यायितमूर्तय:। ३ १।।
पिता पितामहश्चैव ata प्रपितामह:।
तृप्तिं wary पिण्डेन मया दत्तेन भूतले॥ ३ २॥

‘May my father, grandfather and great
grandfather, in this persons of these
Brahmanas, receive’ satisfaction! May my
father, grandfather and great grandfather
derive nutriment from these oblations to fire!

fron पितामहश्चैव तथैव प्रपितामह:।
तृप्तिं प्रयान्तु मे भक्त्या मन्मयैतदिहाकृतम्। ३ ३॥

May my father, grandfather and great
grandfather derive satisfaction from the balls
of food placed by me upon the ground! May
my father, grandfather and great grandfather
be pleased with what I have this day offered
them in faith!

मातामहस्तृप्तिमुपैतु तस्य

तथा पिता तस्य पिता तथान्य:।
विश्वे च देवा: परमां प्रयान्तु

Bis प्रणश्यन्तु च AQAA ३४॥
यज्ञेश्चरो हव्यसमस्तकव्य-

भोक्ताव्ययात्मा हरिरीश्वरोऽत्र।

281

तत्सन्निधानादपयान्तु सद्यो
रक्षांस्यशेषाण्यसुराश्च WAN ३५॥

May my maternal grandfather, his father
and his father, also enjoy contentment from
my offerings! May all the gods experience
gratification and all evil beings perish! May
the lord of sacrifice, the imperishable deity
Hari, be the acceptor of all oblations made to
the manes or the gods! and may all malignant
spirits and enemies of the deities, depart from
the rite."

दद्यादाचमनार्थाय तेभ्यो वारि सकृत् WHT ३६॥
सुतृप्तैस्तैरनुज्ञात: सर्वेणान्नेन भूतले।

सतिलेन तत: पिण्डान् सम्यग् दद्यात् समाहित:।॥ ३७॥

पितृर्तंर्थिन सतिल।न् दद्यादथ जल।ञ्जलंळंन्।

मातामहेभ्यस्तेनैव पिण्डांस्तीर्थेन Rata ३ ८॥
दाक्षिणाप्रवणञ्चैव प्रयत्नेनोपपादयेत्।
अवकाशेषु Way जलतीरेषु चैव हि॥३९॥
दक्षिणाग्रेषु दर्भेषु पुष्पधूपादिपूजितम्।

स्वपित्रे went पिण्डं दद्यादुच्छिष्टसन्निधौ।। voi
पितामहाय चैवान्यत् तत्पित्रे च तथापरम्।
दर्भमूले लेपभुज: प्रीणयेल्लेपघर्षणै:।। ४१॥

"When the Brahmanas have been
sufficiently, the worshipper must scatter some
of the food upon the ground and present them
individually with water to rinse their mouths;
then, with their assent, he may place upon the
ground balls made up of boiled rice and
condiments, along with sesamum-seeds. With
the part of his hand sacred to the manes he
must offer sesamum-seeds and water from his
joined palms; and with the same part of his
hand he. must present cakes to his maternal
ancestors. He should in lonely places,
naturally beautiful and by the side of sacred
streams, diligently make presents (to the
manes and the Brahmanas).'? Upon Kuga grass
the tips of which are pointed to the south and
lying near the fragments of the meant, let the
householder present the first ball of food,
consecrated with flowers and incense, to his
