162

THE VISNU-PURANAM

north, a similar word. Madru, is applied to Madura
in the south. As. Res. IX. 428. The Ramayana has
Madras in the east, as well as in the north.

26. The people of the Benares district, and that
opposite.

27. The inhabitants of Ujjayin.

28. These should be opposite to the Kuntis. but
where either is situated does not appear.

29, The best reading is Gomanta. part of the
Konkan about Goa.

30. The more usual reading is Khandas; one MS.
has Parnas.

31, A country of considerable extent and power
at various periods. The name remains in Beder,
which may have been the ancient capital but the
kingdom seems to have corresponded with the great
part of Berar and Kandesh. It is mentioned in the
Ramayana and the Puranas amongst the countries
of the south.

32. Also Ripavasikas. There is a Rupa river
from the Suktimat mountain, the vicinity of which
may be alluded to. We have Ripasas or Rapapas
amongst the southern tribes of the Puranas.

33. Read also Asmalas and Asmakas : the latter
are enumerated amongst the people of the south in
the Ramayana. and in the Vayu, Matsya, and
Markandeya P. There is a prince of the same name
of the solar dynasty.

34. Gova or Kuva is an ancient name of the
southern Konkan, and may be intended in this place
by the Gopa country; or it may imply ‘the district of
cow-herds.’ that is of Nomadic tribes.

35. Also read Kulatis and Panitakas.

36. Read also Adhirajya and Adhirastra, which
miean the same, ‘the over or superior kingdom.’

37. Also Kusadhya, Kusanda, and Mukuntha.

38. Also Vallirastra. There are Mailas in the east,
along the foot of the Himalaya, in Bhima's Dig-
vijaya; but we should rather look for them in the
north-west, in the site of the Malli of Arrian. We
have in the Puranas. Maharastra, the Mahratta
country, which may be here intended.

39. Two copies read Kevala; one, Kambala. The
text is probably wrong, as we have Kerala below.

40. Also Varayasis and Varavasis: one copy has,
what is likely to be most correct, Vanarasyas, ‘the
monkey-faced people.

41. Réid Upavaha and Pravaha.

42. The MSS. agree in reading this Vakra.

43. The Sakas occur again, more than once,
which may be possibly unnecessary repetition ; but
these people, the Sakai and Sacae of classical
writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy, extended,
about the commencement of our era, along the west
of India, from the Hindu Koh to the mouths of the
Indus.

44. The inhabitants of Tirhut.

45. The people of South Behar.

46. Also read Mahy as and Suhmas : the latter is
probably correct. The Suhmas and Prasuhmas were
found in the east by Bhima : and Suhma is
elsewhere said to be situated east of Bengal,
towards the sea, the king and the people being
Mlechchhas, that is not Hindus it would
correspond therefore with Tiperah and Aracan.

47. Also read Malajas, but less correctly perhaps.
The Malayas are the people of the southern Ghats.

48. We have Pravijayas in the east, according to
the Puranas.

49. Anga is the country about Bhagalpur, of
which Champa was the capital.

50. Eastern Bengal.

51. We have had these before, but they are
repeated perhaps in conformity to the usual
classification, which connects them with the two
preceding, being derived in the genealogical lists
from a common ancestor.

52. In Bhima's Dig-vijaya we have two people of
this name, both in the east; one along the foot of the
Himalaya, and the other more to the south.

53, Uniformly read in the MSS. Sudesna.

54. Three copies read Mahisas. We have Mahis
akas amongst the southern people in the Puranas;
and a Mahisiki in the Ramayana, also in the South:
the latter may be connected with Méhismati, which
Sahadeva visits in his southern invasion, and which
has been elsewhere conjectured to be in Mysore.
(Calcutta Annual Register. 1822.) There is also a
Mahismati on the road to the south (Mahabh.
Udyoga P.), which is commonly identified with
Chuli Mahesvar, on the Narmada.

55. Also Rsikas; people placed by the Ramayana
both in the north and in the south. Arjuna visits the
former, and exacts from them eight horses- Dig-
vijaya.
