BOOK V, CHAP. 23

481

creator of the world; and beside you there is
not any thing.
मया संसारचक्रेऽस्मिन् भ्रमता भगवन् सदा।
तापत्रयाभिभूतेन न प्राप्ता निर्वृति: क्वचित्।। ३६॥
दु:खान्येव सुखानीति मृगतृष्णा जलाशया।
तथा नाथ। गृहतानि तानि तापाय चाभवन्॥ ३७॥
राष्ट्रमुर्वी wet कोशो मित्रपक्षस्तथात्मजा:।
भार्या भृत्यजना ये च शब्द्याद्या विषया: प्रभो।३ ८॥
सुखबुद्धया मया wa गृहीतमिदमव्यय।
परिणामे तदेवेश तापात्मकमभून्मम।। 3 ९॥

O lord, I have been whirled round in the
circle of worldly, existence for ever and have
suffered the three classes of affliction, and
there is no rest whatever. I have mistaken
pains for pleasures, like sultry vapours for a
pool of water; and their enjoyment has yielded
me nothing but sorrow. The earth, dominion,
forces, treasures, friends, children, wife,
dependants, all the objects of sense, have I
possessed, imagining them to be sourccs of
happiness; but I found that in their changcable
nature, O lord, they were nothing but vexation.

देवलोकमिमं प्राप्तो नाथ।! देवगणेऽप्ययम्।
Wet: साहायकामोऽभूच्छाश्वती Har निर्वृति:।।४०॥
त्वामनाराध्य जगतां सर्वेषां प्रभवास्पदम्।
Bradt प्राप्यते केन परमेश्वर! निर्वृति:।। ४१1
MATT तापान् प्रेतराजाननं ATS AN
ततो निजक्रियासूतिनरकेष्वतिदारुणम्।
प्राप्नुवन्ति नरा दु:खमस्वरूपविदस्तव।। ४३॥
अहमत्यन्तविषयी मोहितस्तव मायया।
ममत्वगर्वगत्तन्तिर्भरमामि WAAL ४४॥
सोऽहं त्वां शरणमपारमीशमीड्यं

wore: परमपदं यतो न किंश्चित्।
संसास्थ्रमपरितापतप्तचेता

निर्वाणे परिणतधाम्नि साभिलाष:।॥४५॥
इति श्रीविष्णुपुराणे पञ्चमांशे त्रयोरविंश: अध्याय:॥
The gods themselves, though high in

heaven, were in need of my alliance. Where

then is everlasting repose? Who without
adoring you, who are the origin of all worlds,
shall attain, O supreme deity, that rest which
endures for ever .? Beguiled by thy delusions,
and ignorant of thy nature, men. after suffering
the various penalties of birth, death and
infirmity, behold the countenance of the king
of ghosts, and suffer in hell dreadful tortures,
the reward of their own deeds. Addicted to
sensual objects, through thy- delusions I
revolve in the whirpool of selfishness and
pride; and hence I come to you, as my final
refuge, who are the lord deserving of all
homage, than whom there is no other asylum;
my mind afflicted with repentance for my trust
in the world, and desiring the fulness of
felicity, emancipation from all existence."
kK

NOTES

\, This legend of the origin of Kalayavana is
given also by the Hari Vamsa. The Bhagavata, like
our text, comes at once to the siege of Mathura by
this chief; but the Hari Vaméa suspendeds the story,
for more than thirty chapters, to narrate an origin of
the Yadavas, and sundry adventures of Krsna and
Rama to the south-west. Most of these have no
other authority, and are no doubt inventions of the
Dakhini compiler; and the others are misplaced.

2. So the Bhagavata describes him as leading a
host of Mlecchas, or barbariam, againct Krsna: but
in the Mahabharta, Sabha Parvan, where Krsna
deaeribes the power of Jarasandha, he admits that
he and the Yadavas fled from Mathura to the west,
through fear of that king, but no account is given of
any siege of Mathura, by Kalayavana. The only
indication of such a person is the mention that
Bhagadatta, the Yavana king, ‘who rules over Muru
and Naraka in the west and south, is one of his most
attached feudatories. This king is in various other
places called king to Pragjyotish, as he is in a
subsequent passage of the same book, Sabha P.,
and this name is always applied to the west of
Assam. His subjects are, however, still Yavanas
and Mlecchas, and he presents horses, caps set with
jewels, and swords with ivory hilts", articles
scarcely to be found in Assam, which cannot well
be the seat of his sovereignty. It seems most likely
